A Meta-Analysis of Parent-Involved Treatment for Child Sexual AbuseJacqueline CorcoranVijayan PillaiVirginia Commonwealth UniversitySexual abuse in children not only occurs with alarming frequency, it also potentially leads to deleterious conse-quences for victims. Previous narrative reviews have touted the benefits of including the nonoffending caregiver inchild sexual treatment. Objective: A meta-analysis is conducted to determine the effects of parent-involved treat-ment in four major child symptom areas: internalizing, externalizing, sexualized behaviors, and posttraumaticstress. Method: Only comparison/control group studies are included. Participant, treatment, and methodologicalcharacteristics of studies are coded, as well as information to calculate effect sizes. An overall effect size is cal-culated, though the small number of studies precluded moderator analysis. Results: Seven studies are located thatmet the inclusion criteria. At posttest, treatment had small effects in the four outcome domains over alternativeinterventions and was reduced still further at follow-up. Conclusion: Parent-involved treatment confers someadvantage over comparison conditions (typically child-only treatment).Keywords:sexual abuse; treatment outcome; posttraumatic stress disorder; meta-analysis
Rates of sexual abuse in North America range from30% to 40% of females and 13% of males (Bolen &Scannapieco, 1999; Briere & Elliott, 2003). Along withthese high prevalence rates are the potentially seriouseffects of sexual abuse, which may include short-termeffects of depression, suicide, sexual promiscuity, sexualperpetration, and academic underachievement (Paolucci,Genuis, & Violato, 2001). The long-term impact of child sexual abuse in adulthood may involve depression,low self-esteem, somatization, anger, posttraumatic stresssymptomatology, anxiety, obsessions and compulsions,sexual dysfunctions, self-mutilation, suicidality, dissocia-tion, substance abuse problems, revictimization, and rela-tionship problems (Jumper, 1995; Neumann, Houskamp,Pollock, & Briere, 1996). Sexual abuse, therefore, affectsa large percentage of children, who are at considerable riskfor impaired mental health and adjustment in both child-hood and adulthood.
Certain factors pose risks for more serious conse-quences. These include aspects of the abuse (sexual abusewithin the family, ongoing and multiple episodes, the useof force, methods used to gain child secrecy, and multipleperpetrators), legal system involvement (a case that resultsin acquittal), and maternal response to the sexual abuse(lack of maternal support and maternal use of avoidantcoping mechanisms) (Wolfe, 1998; Wolfe & Birt, 1997).Many of these variables are not subject to change, suchas aspects of abuse that have already occurred, but mater-nal support is one area that can be affected by intervention,with significant consequences for both short- and long-term adjustment (Adams-Tucker, 1982; Conte &Schuerman, 1987; Edwards & Alexander, 1992; Everson,Hunter, Runyon, Edelsohn, & Coulter, 1989; Gold, 1986;Nash, Hulsey, Sexton, Harralson, & Lambert, 1993;Peters, 1988; Tufts New England Medical Center,Division of Child Psychiatry, 1984; Wind & Silvern, 1994;Wyatt & Mickey, 1987). Mothers may also suffer a greatdeal of distress at learning of their children's sexual abuse,and their negative reactions may impede children's recov-ery (see Corcoran, 1998).Intervention may be helpful for caregivers to assistthem in coping with stressors associated with sexual abuseof their child, such as separation from a partner, loss ofsocial support, and being involved in legal proceedings.Learning about abuse dynamics can also reduce distress(Deblinger & Heflin, 1996). For instance, caregivers areAuthors' Note: The authors gratefully acknowledge Geraldine MacDonald,Paul Ramchandani, and Julian Higgins for their assessment of the quality indi-cators of the primary studies. Correspondence may be addressed to JacquelineCorcoran, PhD, School of Social Work, Northern Virginia Branch, VirginiaCommonwealth University, 6295 Edsall Road Suite 210, Alexandria, VA 22312;e-mail: 
often upset because they did not learn of the abuse sooner,but they can be told that perpetrators often involve theirvictims in secrecy. In addition, treatment can assist moth-ers in learning about how to identify and handle symptomsin their children and to respond appropriately to children'squestions and concerns.For these reasons, treatment involving the nonoffend-ing caregiver, as well as the child victim, has been devel-oped (i.e., Cohen & Mannarino, 1993; Deblinger &Heflin, 1996). These treatments are typically cognitive-behavioral in their theoretical orientation and involveseparate sessions for the caregiver and the child,although at the latter part of treatment, conjoint sessionsare often involved.Reviews of this treatment outcome literature indicatesupport for the parent-involved treatments. For instance,Putnam (2003) claimed that they "are currently the best-documented, effective treatments" for sexual abuse inchildren. However, Putnam further stated that certainsymptoms, including aggression and sexualized behavior,were difficult to affect by these interventions. A review ofstudies conducted before 2000 also touted abuse-specificcognitive-behavioral therapy over comparison group con-ditions (Saywitz, Mannarino, Berliner, & Cohen, 2000).These authors concluded that training parents in behavioraltechniques is necessary to reduce externalizing symptomsand sexual acting out in children. Another review classifiedabuse-focused, parent-involved, cognitive-behavioral ther-apy as the only "well-supported, efficacious treatment" forsexually abused children (Saunders, Berliner, & Hanson,2003). Key components of well-supported, efficacioustreatments include that they offer manualized treatmentthat has produced superior results over comparison condi-tions in at least two randomized controlled trails.A final review summarized outcomes of parent-involved sexual abuse treatment by developmental stage(Corcoran, 2004). For the preschool-age child and theirparents, cognitive-behavioral treatment of parents andchildren offered benefits in many domains for bothparents and children over nondirective supportive com-parison treatment. Although mixed findings were foundfor the effect of treatment on children's externalizingsymptoms, children's sexualized behavior, a particularlyintractable symptom area, was affected positively. Justas for the results of sexually abused preschool children,cognitive-behavioral parent-involved treatment showedclear benefits over the comparison conditions in studiesfor school-age children across multiple domains of childfunctioning. However, posttraumatic stress disorder(PTSD) was one domain in which child-only treatmentalone seemed to confer benefits (Deblinger, Lippmann,& Steer, 1996; King et al., 2000).
To summarize the narrative reviews, parent-involvedtreatment for sexual abuse in children has been regardedas one, if not the best, available treatment for child sexualvictimization. Narrative reviews are mixed as to whetheraggressive/externalizing and sexual acting out in childrencan be affected by these interventions. The findings ofthese narrative reviews are complicated by the fact that out-comes in these studies are often many, including PTSD,other anxiety symptoms, depression, behavior problems,and sexual acting out, and by the use of multiple measuresto assess these outcomes. For these reasons, it is difficult tosummarize findings across studies at the different periodsat which data are collected.Narrative reviews are subject to certain limitations,namely their reliance on statistical significance. This "votecount" method--counting a study's findings as positive ifstatistically significant results are reported--is vulnerableto certain bias. A major limitation of vote counting is itsreliance on tests of statistical significance in the primarystudies. Significance tests are affected by sample size. Instudies with very large samples, clinically insignificantdifferences will be statistically significant. Significancetests (p values) do not tell us the strength or magnitude ofthe effect, so vote counting may tally positive scores thatdo not really matter (clinically insignificant effects in largestudies). Conversely, studies based on small samples oftenlack the statistical power needed to detect meaningfuleffects. Thus, clinically significant effects can be missedwhen small studies are combined with vote counting.During the review process of this article, a system-atic review of cognitive-behavioral treatment for childsexual abuse victims was published (Macdonald, Higgins,& Ramchandani, 2006). In all, 10 studies were locatedthat met the inclusion criteria. Although some support wasprovided for the effectiveness of cognitive-behavioraltreatment, the conclusion was tempered by the qualityof the primary studies.Because we were interested in the specific impact ofparent involvement in child sexual abuse treatment, notnecessarily the theoretical orientation of this treatmentand because of the limitations inherent in the narrativereviews conducted in this area, a meta-analysis wasundertaken of this literature.
METHODOLOGY FOR META-ANALYSISThe main purpose of the study was to conduct a meta-analysis to determine how parent-involved treatment ofchild sexual abuse victims affected child adjustment interms of the following symptom areas when compared toanother type of treatment or a control group: internalizing
symptoms, externalizing symptoms, sexualized behaviors,and/or PTSD. A secondary purpose was to determine theinfluence of participant-, intervention-, and design-relatedvariables on symptom domain effect sizes.Inclusion criteria for the meta-analysis included the fol-lowing: (a) Sexual abuse was the reason for treatmentreferral; (b) treatment was provided to children rather thanadult survivors of sexual abuse; (c) parents had to beinvolved in the treatment, although the child's sexualabuse was a focus of the intervention; (d) studies had toassess the result of treatment on child internalizing symp-toms (e.g., depression, anxiety), externalizing (behaviorproblems), sexual behavior problems, or PTSD; and (e)comparison or control group designs were required.Although randomization to treatment and control condi-tions was not necessary, single-group pretest, posttestdesigns were excluded, and (f) authors of studies had toprovide the necessary statistical information to calculateeffect sizes.Databases were searched from 1980 to summer 2005and included the following: CINAHL, Infotrac, Medline,Psychinfo, Social Sciences Index, and Social WorkResearch and Abstracts. Search terms included child sexualabuse (e.g., victimization, molestation), treatment (e.g.,therapy, intervention), and outcome (e.g., research, evalua-tion). The National Clearinghouse of Abuse and Neglectand the four first authors of the primary parent-involvedstudies were also contacted for their knowledge of otherstudies meeting our criteria. Only one of the study authorsresponded to e-mail inquiry, and no new studies wereadded as a result of these contacts. Furthermore, the refer-ence lists of relevant literature reviews were searched forpossible studies. Most recently, the reference list for thesystematic review on cognitive-behavioral treatment ofchild sexual abuse (Macdonald et al., 2006) was searchedfor additional studies, but no new studies were found.Although the exact number of titles and abstractsscreened was not tracked, common reasons for exclusionwere the following: only single group pretest/posttestgroup designs were used, parents were not involved in thechild's treatment, the study outcomes studies were not oneof the four outcomes of interest, and statistical informationnecessary to calculate an effect size was not present. Forreasons for exclusion of particular studies, please contactthe first author. When all studies were screened, seven out-come studies became the subject of this meta-analysis.Because of the few number of studies, moderator analysiswas precluded.
CodingStudies were coded both by the principle investigatorand a team of two trained master's in social workstudents, who were taking an advanced research course.In addition to statistical data, design-, participant-, andtreatment-related variables were also coded. Design-related variables included the research design, the typeof comparison/control group employed, the presence offollow-up and its length, measures used to assess inter-nalizing and externalizing symptoms and sexual behav-ior problems, and quality rating. Participant-relatedvariables included race, gender, socioeconomic status,and mean age of the children treated. Treatment-relatedvariables involved the theoretical orientation of thetreatment, the length of the intervention in terms of ses-sion length and number of sessions, and the modalityemployed. Any discrepancies in coding were discussedto consensus.Quality aspects of studies included the following: typeof randomization method, the extent to which participantand assessment blinding occurred, the extent of attrition,and whether intention-to-treat analyses were conducted.Data Analysis
To compare the effectiveness of interventions acrossstudies, the effect size measure known as Hedges's (1981)g, a standardized mean effect size formula that corrects forsmall sample size, was computed using ComprehensiveMeta-Analysis (Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, & Rothstein,2005). Because all data were continuous, the same effectsize formula was used throughout.Estimates of effect sizes are expressed as fractions ordigits and are called "point estimates." They are estimatesof the unknown population parameter, the effect size ofinterest. A single number may not provide a reasonablyclose estimate of the population because of random errorand other factors. To get a more comprehensive estimateof the effect size, the range of probabilities, including thetrue population effect size, is provided through the con-struction of a confidence interval. The confidence intervalincorporates a set of possible values that includes, withspecified probability, the true mean. Three pieces of infor-mation are necessary to construct a confidence interval:the effect size (ES), the standard error (SE) of the effectsize, and the z score, the value of which will depend on theselected level of confidence, such as .05. The confidenceinterval is created around X, the population effect size beingestimated. The length of the interval on either side of X isobtained using the formula: ES - Z*se <= X <= ES + Z. If theconfidence interval includes the "null effect," the effect sizeis not statistically significant. If the confidence interval doesnot include the "null effect" value, then the effect size is sig-nificant at the selected level of confidence.Estimation of the mean effect size requires making achoice between two types of assumptions with respect
to the error structure: fixed effect and random effectmodeling. Fixed and random effect modeling are basedon two different conceptual approaches to meta-analysis,which lead to different calculations of the overall meaneffect size. Under the fixed effect approach, the overallmean effect size is obtained while making allowances forthe random error within studies. In the fixed effect model-ing, the variation in effect size between studies is ignored;the assumption is that all studies estimate the same effectand that study effects vary only because of random varia-tion between research participants (Raudenbush, 1994).As a result, the weights assigned to the studies depend onthe sampling error within the studies.Under the random effect model, the combined effectis an average of a number of effect size estimates of dif-ferent populations. Here, the overall effect size incorpo-rates information about sampling error within studies aswell as the variation in effect size between studies. Evensmall studies provide unique information about popula-tion effect size. This information is included to arrive atan overall mean effect size.The random effect model takes into account moresources of variation in effect sizes than fixed effect mod-els. As a result, the confidence intervals of the overallmean effect size in the random effect model are likely tobe wider than the same under the fixed effect assump-tion. The conceptual basis for random effect modelingsuggests that both within-study error and between-studyvariance need to be taken into account. The total varia-tion in random effect modeling is then apportioned intowithin-study error and between-study variance. Whenbetween-studies variance is small, the total variation isassigned to within-study error. Under this assumption,there is no difference in the overall effect size derivedfrom either the fixed effect or the random effect model-ing approach. However, when between-study variance isassumed to be present, the random effect model is anappropriate choice to estimate the overall effect size.In this study, the mean effect sizes were calculatedunder both assumptions separately. Under the fixed effectmodel, if the pooled variance estimate is large, greaterthan 0, the assumption that the only source of variation intrue effect sizes is due to sampling error may not be appro-priate. Thus, in meta-analysis, random effect models areused to explain heterogeneity among effect sizes beyondthe variations related to fixed effects.In the meta-analysis, the extent of homogeneity amongeffect sizes related to each of the four outcomes is indicatedby the Q statistic. The total heterogeneity, QT, is testedagainst a chi-squared distribution with n-1 degrees of free-dom (Gurevitch & Hedges, 1993s). In the event of suffi-cient numbers of studies, moderator analysis would be
conducted to determine if participant-, intervention-, ordesign-related variables were associated with varyingeffect sizes.RESULTSThe treatment-, participant-, and design-related infor-mation of studies included in this meta-analysis are por-trayed in Table 1. Assessment of methodological qualitiesof studies is displayed in Table 2. Because only two stud-ies used a no-treatment control group and all relied oncomparison groups, the decision was made to calculateeffect sizes on only the treatment versus comparisongroups so as to be consistent. This also observes the rec-ommendation that independent effect sizes should be cal-culated from each study in a meta-analysis (Hedges &Olkin, 1985). When multiple comparison groups wereemployed in studies, the decision was made to use onlythe child-oriented treatment condition, as that was seen asthe most widely used approach in practice settings. Finally,in the case of multiple follow-up periods (Deblinger et al.,1996), the decision was made to take the first follow-upperiod.Results of the meta-analysis will be provided separatelyfor each outcome. Although results are presented for bothposttest and follow-up effect sizes, the reader should notethat the follow-up effect sizes are based on very few stud-ies and should be viewed with caution as a result.
Six of the seven studies used the Child Behavior Check-list Internalizing and Externalizing scales (Achenbach &Edelbrock, 1991). Although studies employed other mea-sures for depression, anxiety, and behavior problems, thesewere few and measures used were not consistent acrossstudies. Therefore, to maintain homogeneity, only theChild Behavior Checklist scales were used to representinternalizing and externalizing symptoms; in this way,comparisons across studies could be made more easily.Table 3 presents the effect sizes and variances for allthe outcomes related to "internalizing." Figure 1 pre-sents the confidence intervals for each of these effectsizes. At posttest, two of the six effect sizes are moder-ate, with values greater than 0.5 and less than 0.8(Cohen, 1988), with the treatment effect in the expecteddirection. However, all but two of the confidence inter-vals for these effect sizes contain the null effect size.Table 4 presents the mean effect size under the fixed andrandom effect assumptions. The p value of the Q statis-tic, with a magnitude of 3.45 and 5 degrees of freedom,is not significant at the .05 level, suggesting the absenceof significant heterogeneity among the effect sizes.The mean effect size under the random effect modelassumption is .41, with a confidence interval rangingfrom .21 to .61, suggesting a small treatment effect oninternalizing outcome. The mean effect size at follow-up (represented by only two studies) is small, nearly .35.However, the confidence interval is large, with the nulleffect size well within the range of the confidence inter-val (see Figure 2).
Six studies reported externalizing outcomes at posttest,whereas three assessed these outcomes at follow-up. Table5 presents the effect sizes and variances for all the exter-nalizing outcomes. Figure 3 presents the confidence inter-vals for each of these effect sizes. Most of the effect sizesare small. The mean effect size presented in Table 4 issmall, nearly .32, and has a confidence interval that doesnot contain the null effect size (see Figure 3). The p valueTABLE 1:Treatment and Design Information on Meta-Analysis StudiesDescription of TreatmentCelano, Hazzard, Webb, & McCall(1996)Eight 1-hr sessions divided betweencaregiver and child; 2 to 3 conjointCohen & Mannarino (1996, 1997)Cognitive-behavioral12 sessions, individual with bothparent and childCohen & Mannarino (1998a); Cohen,Mannarino, & Knudsen (2005)aCognitive-behavioral12 sessions, individual with bothparent and childCohen et al. (2004)12 weekly cognitive-behavioralindividual sessions for parent andchild. In three sessions, a joint 30-min parent-child session was held.Deblinger et al. (1996); Deblinger,Steer, & Lippmann (1999)12 individual cognitive-behavioralsessions for both parent and childseparately; in latter stage of ther-apy, cojoint sessionsDeblinger, Stauffer, & Steer (2001)Cognitive-behavioral group therapyfor both child and parent; 8 sessions; for cognitive-behavioral condition, 15 minute parent-childactivity per week.King et al. (2000)Cognitive-behavioral 20 individualparent and child sessions focusingon posttraumatic symptomsSample
N = 32 sexually abusedgirls (ages 8 to 13) and their nonoffendingcaregivers75% African AmericanN = 67 children (M age =4.68) and caregivers50% male, 50% female;50% White, 50% African AmericanN = 67 children (M age =11.08) and caregivers69% female; 59% White,37% African AmericanN = 180 children (M age =10.76) and caregivers79% female; 60% White,28% African AmericanN = 90 children (ages 7 to 13)83% female;72% White,20% African AmericanN = 44 children (ages 2 to 8) and caretakers61% female; 64% White,21% African AmericanN = 36 children (M age = 11.4)69% female, 31% maleDesignExperimental, randomization totreatment vs. treatment-as-usual usualExperimental, randomization toparent-child CBT or child supportive therapyExperimental, randomization tothree experimental conditions:parent-only, child-only, parentand child, and communitycontrol, follow-up (6, 12, and24 months)Experimental, randomization to cognitive behavioral or supportive therapies, 3-monthfollow-upExperimental design, random-ized to child alone cognitive-behavioral treatment, familycognitive-behavioral treat-ment, or waiting-list control,12-week follow-upOutcomesCBCL InternalizingCBCL ExternalizingCBCL PTSDCITES-R PTSDCBCL InternalizingCBCL ExternalizingChild Sexual Behavior InventoryCBCL InternalizingCBCL ExternalizingChild Sexual Behavior InventoryCBCL InternalizingCBCL ExternalizingPTSD section of KiddieSchedule for AffectiveDisorders and Schizophreniafor School-Age Children-Epidemiologic versionChild Sexual Behavior InventoryPTSD section of KiddieSchedule for AffectiveDisorders and Schizophreniafor School-Age Children-Epidemiologic versionCBCL InternalizingCBCL ExternalizingCBCL PTSDPTSD section of the child version of the AnxietyDisorders Interview Schedulefor DSM-IV
NOTE: CITES-R = Children's Impact of Traumatic Events Scale-Revised; CBT = cognitive behavioral therapy; CBCL = Child BehaviorChecklist; PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; DSM-IV = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed.; AmericanPsychiatric Association, 1994).a. The reason more than one citation is listed for some studies is that investigators reported results for posttest and follow-up in separate publications.b. The follow-up study (Cohen et al., 2005) was not included in the meta-analysis because the analysis was done on intent-to-treat rather thancompleters of treatment.TABLE 2:Methodological Quality of StudiesaCelano et al.(1996)Cohen &Mannarino(1996,1997)Cohen &Mannarino(1998b)Deblinger et al.(1999)King et al.(2000)Method notreported.Participantsrandomizedafter pretreatmentassessment.Not reportedNot reportedNot reportedNot reportedA psychiatrist orpsychologist blind tothe treatmentcondition rated thechild's overallpsychosocialfunctioning basedon child andcaretaker interviews.Standardizedmeasures wereadministered by aclinician not involvedin the child'streatment, but notreported as blind tothe treatmentcondition.No.All but one of the childoutcome measureswas completed bythe child's parent.2004 paper reportsthat the evaluatorconducting initialand follow-upassessments wasblind to treatmentcondition orassignment.Assessors not blinded.Assessmentsconducted bytherapists.Two participants dropped out beforetreatment began. It is not clear whetherthey had already been randomized.Of the 15 who dropped out after treatmentbegan, 10 dropped out of theexperimental group and 5 from the controlgroup.
Thirteen of the 86 participants dropped outduring treatment. A further 6 wereremoved because of persistent sexuallyinappropriate behavior.No information is provided about thedistribution of these dropouts andexclusions.At follow-up, data on only 43 of the originalparticipants are presented. No informationis provided about the reasons for thesesubsequent losses of data (other than the"kinds" of reason) or their distributionacross groups.Four participants dropped out betweenassessment and intervention.Ten participants dropped out aftercompleting three or fewer sessions.Ten dropped out after completing betweenfour and eight sessions.Nine were removed for persistent contactsexualized behaviors.Eleven children dropped out of theexperimental group, 22 from the controlgroup.Larger numbers of children were removedfrom the control group than from theexperimental group for ongoing sexualbehaviors toward other children (7compared to 2).Ten participants dropped out of the studyduring treatment. The dropout appears tobe three participants from the waitlistcontrol and two of the experimentalgroups and one from the child-onlyexperimental group.Missing data increased over time, but noinformation given on the total numbers ortheir distribution across groups.Between recruitment and treatment 10families lost out of 32 eligible familiesreferred.During treatmentExperimental groups each lost threeparticipants.Community control group lost twoparticipants.Not reportedNot reportedNot reportedYes(continued)TABLE 2:(continued)Study IDCohen et al.(2004)Deblinger et al.(2001)RandomizationMethod notreportedTherapeuticmethod wasrandomlydeterminedby computerprogram priorto the initia-tion of agroup.ParticipantBlindingNot reportedNot reported
Assessment BlindingAll therapists trained inboth modalities,therefore assessorswere blind to whichtherapy had beenused in anyparticular case.All therapists weretrained in bothapproaches usedAttritionTwenty-six of the 229 children originallyrandomized dropped out of the study.Five (2%) never returned for treatment.Eight (3%) left after attending one session.Thirteen (6%) left after attending only twosessions.Sixty-seven mothers volunteered for theproject.Four did not return for assignment.Five left after attending one session.Four left after attending two sessions.These 13 were treated as dropouts.Of the 54 who completed at least threegroup sessions (and were thereforeincluded in the analyses) only 44completed both posttest and 3-monthfollow-up evaluations. One mother failed tocomplete the posttest evaluation and afurther nine failed to complete either. The2001 paper reports data on these 44.Intention-To-TreatAnalysesYesNoTABLE 4:Mean Effect Size and Measure of Heterogeneity for Effect SizesVariable (Time Frame)TypePoint EstimateLowerUpperProbabilityHeterogeneity (Q Value)dfProbabilityNOTE: PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; CI = confidence interval.a. A follow-up effect size is not provided for sexual behaviors because results were only based on one study.TABLE 3:Effect Sizes (Hedge's d) for Internalizing Outcomes at Posttest
of the Q statistic, with a magnitude of 2.10 and 5 degreesof freedom, is not significant at the .05 level, suggesting theabsence of significant heterogeneity among the effect sizes.The mean effect size at follow-up is small, and the nulleffect size is well within the range of the confidence inter-val (see Figure 4).Sexual BehaviorsChild sexual behaviors were assessed less frequently instudies; only four of the studies researched this outcome.However, all used the Child Sexual Behavior Inventory(Friedrich et al., 1992). Only one study followed up withthis outcome over time. Effect sizes related to sexualbehavior are presented in Table 6. Two of the effect sizevalues, .54 and .38, are medium and small, and theremaining two are small effects. Two of the four effects, aspresented in Figure 5, have confidence intervals that donot contain the null effect. The mean effect size, under thefixed effect assumption, is .31 (see Table 4). The effect issmall, and its confidence interval does not contain the nulleffect. These results suggest that, very likely, the treatmenteffect on behavioral outcomes is significant. The p valueof the Q statistic, with a magnitude of 1.35 and 3 degreesof freedom, is not significant at the .05 level, suggestingthe absence of significant heterogeneity among the effectsizes.Figure 6 presents the effect size for the only sexual-ized behavior outcome at the follow-up stage. The effectsize (Hedges d) is .445, with a variance of .022 and a pvalue of .003 (see Table 6). The lower and upper limit ofthe confidence intervals are .152 and .739, respectively.
PTSDFive studies reported PTSD outcomes at posttest,whereas only three assessed this outcome at the follow-upstage. Table 7 presents these effect sizes and variances,and Figure 7 demonstrates the confidence intervals foreach of these effect sizes. At posttest, most of the effectsizes are small. Only one of the six effect sizes, that withthe value .526, does not contain the null effect size wellwithin the confidence interval. The mean effect size aspresented in Table 4 is small, nearly .365 under the fixedTABLE 5:Effect Sizes (Hedge's d) for Externalizing OutcomesPosttestFollow-UpStudyEffectVarianceProbabilityEffectVarianceProbabilityeffect assumption. The p value of the Q statistic, with amagnitude 3.45 and 4 degrees of freedom, is not signifi-cant at the .05 level, suggesting the absence of significantheterogeneity among the effect sizes.At follow-up, all three effect sizes contain the nulleffect size well within their confidence intervals (seeFigure 8). The mean effect size (see Table 4) is small,and the null effect size is comfortably within the rangeof the confidence interval of the mean effect size.Fail-Safe NThe fail safe N is the number of unpublished studiesthat would have to be added to the meta-analysis to movethe results from significance to nonsignificance. The failsafe N using the Rosenthal method is approximately 16 forthe internalizing symptoms domain, 10 for the externaliz-ing outcome, 5 for the sexualized behavior outcome, and 4 for the PTSD outcomes. These fail safe Ns are notnecessarily large and call for guarded caution with respectto the findings of this meta-analysis.
DISCUSSION AND APPLICATION TO SOCIAL WORK PRACTICEIn general, the results of this meta-analysis suggest that,at posttest, parent-involved treatment of child sexual abusevictims have small effects on child adjustment over varioustypes of comparison treatment. Internalizing outcomesshow the strongest effects, followed by PTSD, sexualbehaviors, and externalizing behaviors. There was questionin the narrative reviews about whether parent-involvedtreatment affected externalizing symptoms, sexual actingout, and PTSD symptoms over child treatment. It is inter-esting that effects were quite similar across symptomdomains in terms of their being categorized as small,according to Cohen (1988). These findings can be viewedimportant as most of the comparison conditions involveintervention (usually child treatment). Indeed, according toLipsey (1998), an effect size of about .20 has practical sig-nificance in intervention research.At follow-up, treatment effects on the four categoriesof outcomes were smaller still (except for sexualizedbehaviors), and the confidence interval for the meaneffect size for each symptom domain contained the nulleffect. It appears, therefore, that the effects seen atposttest tend to diminish by the follow-up period. Itmust be recognized that far fewer studies assessed out-come at the follow-up period than at posttest (and forsexual behaviors, there was only one study), so theseTABLE 6:Effect Sizes (Hedge's d) for Sexual Behaviors OutcomesPosttestFollow-Up
StudyEffectVarianceProbabilityEffectVarianceProbabilityconclusions do not represent all the studies assessed atposttest. The research recommendation, therefore, isthat parent-involved treatment outcome studies shouldroutinely assess participants at a follow-up period.Finally, it should be noted that the treatments repre-sented here are "brief" in nature--8 to 20 sessions. Thismay indicate that treatments may have to be of longerduration or involve maintenance or "booster" sessionsafter acute treatment so that treatment gains are sus-tained and strengthened.
LimitationsIn addition to the few studies that assessed follow-upinformation, other limitations of this study are thoseinherent to meta-analysis. Although every attempt wasmade to gather all studies that met the criteria, somepublications may have been inadvertently overlooked.Another problem was the lack of comparison/controlgroup studies to include in the meta-analysis. Indeed, sofew studies ended up in the meta-analysis that modera-tor analysis was precluded. Moderator analysis couldreveal potentially useful information, such as the demo-graphic characteristics of the clients or the types ofinterventions that contributed to better outcomes.Another limitation involved the fact that the alterna-tive treatments involved in the effect size calculationsvaried across studies. Some of the alternative treatmentscomprised other types of parent involvement (i.e., treat-ment as usual), and some used child-only treatment.For the internalizing, externalizing, and sexualizedbehaviors outcomes, results were based on parent report.Although there are good reasons to rely on parent report forcertain behaviors, particularly externalizing symptoms(Loeber, Loeber, Wei, Farrington, & Wikstrom, 2002)and sexualized behaviors (Friedrich et al., 1992), parentreports of internalizing symptoms may not be as accurate(Birmaher et al., 1996). Although the internalizing out-come had one of the highest effect sizes overall, this resultmay be inflated by parents'tendencies to see their childrenas less depressed, for instance, than perhaps they are.Part of the rationale for including parents in treatment,as discussed earlier, is because of the distress from whichparents suffer from sexual abuse disclosure. At this point,not all studies focused on how parents are affected by theintervention; in those studies that did examine the result oftreatment on parent functioning, there was a lack of con-sistency in measures across studies. Therefore, currently,
TABLE 7:Effect Sizes (Hedge's d) for PTSD OutcomesPosttestFollow-UpStudyEffectVarianceProbabilityEffect VarianceProbabilityNOTE: PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder.a. Denotes the average of more than one PTSD outcome measure.there are an insufficient number of studies to quantitativelysummarize the effect on parents. Researchers in this areamight also do well to select parent measures that can becompleted across studies to gain an assessment of the over-all impact to parents from their involvement in treatment.One area of interest is that two research teams(Cohen and Mannarino and Deblinger and colleagues)represent five of the seven studies in this meta-analysis.Although careful analysis of the studies determined thatthey represented nonoverlapping samples, whether theirresults will be replicated with other investigators willdepend on future research.Despite the limitations, this meta-analysis contributesto the literature on sexual abuse treatment by quantify-ing the effects of parent-involved treatment on the manydomains of functioning that sexual abuse may affect.Overall, parent-involved treatment confers some advan-tage over comparison conditions (typically child-onlytreatment) at posttest. This finding extends across alldomains studied: internalizing symptoms, externalizingsymptoms, sexualized behaviors, and PTSD. Therefore,the question in the literature about the types of problemsthat parent-involved treatment may affect appears moot;it appears that all outcomes are affected at about anequal amount (a small effect). At follow-up, effect sizestended to diminish, although more follow-up studies areneeded to replicate these meta-analytic results.REFERENCES
Achenbach, T., & Edelbrock, C. (1991). Manual for the ChildBehavior Checklist 4-18 and 1991 profile. Burlington: Universityof Vermont, Department of Psychiatry.Adams-Tucker, C. (1982). Proximate effects of sexual abuse in child-hood: A report on 28 children. American Journal of Psychiatry, 139,1252-1256.American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statisticalmanual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.Birmaher, B., Ryan, N., Williamson, D., Brent, D., Kaufman, J., &Dahl, R. (1996). Childhood and adolescent depression: A reviewof the past 10 years, Part I. Journal of the American Academy ofChild & Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 1427-1439.Bolen, R., & Scannapieco, M. (1999). Prevalence of child sexual abuse:A corrective meta-analysis. Social Service Review, 73, 281-313.Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J., & Rothstein, H. (2005).Comprehensive meta-analysis. Englewood, NJ: Biostat.Briere, J., & Elliott, D. M. (2003). Prevalence and psychologicalsequelae of self-reported childhood physical and sexual abuse ina general population sample of men and women. Child Abuse &Neglect, 27, 1205-1222.Celano, M., Hazzard, A., Webb, C., & McCall, C. (1996). Treatmentof traumagenic beliefs among sexually abused girls and theirmothers: An evaluation study. Journal of Abnormal ChildPsychology, 24, 1-17.Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for behavioral sciences(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.Cohen, J. A., Deblinger, E., Mannarino, A. P., & Steer, R. A. (2004).A multisite, randomized controlled trial for children with sexualabuse-related symptoms. Journal of the American Academy ofChild & Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 393-402.Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (1993). A treatment model for sex-ually abused preschoolers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 8,115-131.Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (1996). A treatment outcome study forsexually abused preschool children: Initial findings. Journal of theAmerican Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 35, 42-50.Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (1997). A treatment study for sexually abused preschool children: Outcome during a one-yearfollow-up. Journal of the American Academy of Child & AdolescentPsychiatry, 36, 1228-1235.Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (1998a). Factors that mediate treat-ment outcome of sexually abused preschool children: Six and 12-month follow-up. Journal of the American Academy of Child &Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 44-51.Cohen, J. A., & Mannarino, A. P. (1998b). Interventions for sexuallyabused children: Initial treatment outcome findings. ChildMaltreatment, 3, 17-26.Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Knudsen, K. (2005). Treating sex-ually abused children: One year follow-up of a randomized con-trolled trial. Child Abuse & Neglect, 29, 135-145.
Conte, J., & Schuerman, J. (1987). Factors associated with an increasedimpact of child sexual abuse. Child Abuse & Neglect, 11, 201-211.Corcoran, J. (2004). Treatment outcome research with the non-offending parents of sexually abused children: A critical review.Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 13, 59-84.Corcoran, J. (1998). In defense of mothers of sexual abuse victims.Families in Society, 79, 358-369.Deblinger, E., & Heflin, A. H. (1996). Treating sexually abusedchildren and their nonoffending parents: A cognitive-behavioralapproach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Deblinger, E., Lippmann, J., & Steer, R. (1996). Sexually abusedchildren suffering posttraumatic stress symptoms: Initial treat-ment outcome findings. Child Maltreatment, 1, 310-321.Deblinger, E., Stauffer, L., & Steer, R. (2001). Comparative effica-cies of supportive and cognitive behavioral group therapies foryoung children who have been sexually abused and their nonof-fending mothers. Child Maltreatment, 6, 332-343.Deblinger, E., Steer, R., & Lippmann, J. (1999). Two-year follow-upstudy of cognitive behavioral therapy for sexually abusedchildren suffering post-traumatic stress symptoms. Child Abuse& Neglect, 23(12), 1371-1378.Edwards, J. J., & Alexander, P. C. (1992). The contribution of familybackground to the long-term adjustment of women sexually abusedas children. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 7, 306-320.Everson, M. D., Hunter, W. H., Runyon, D. K., Edelsohn, G. A., &Coulter, M. A. (1989). Maternal support following disclosure ofincest. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 59, 197-207.Friedrich, W., Grambsch, P., Damon, L., Hewitt, S., Koverola, C., Lang,R., et al. (1992). Child Sexual Behavior Inventory: Normative andclinical comparisons. Psychological Assessment, 4, 303-311.Gold, E. R. (1986). Long-term effects of sexual victimization inchildhood: An attributional approach. Journal of Consulting andClinical Psychology, 54, 471-475.Gurevitch, J., & Hedges, L. V. (1993). Meta-analysis: Combining the results of independent experiments. In S. M. Scheiner & J. Gurevich (Eds.), Design and analysis of ecological experi-ments (pp. 378-398). New York: Chapman and Hill.Hedges, L. (1981). Distribution theory for Glass's estimator of effectsize and related estimates. Journal of Educational Statistics, 6,107-112.Hedges, L., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis.Orlando, FL: Academic Press.Jumper, S. A. (1995). A meta-analysis of the relationship of childsexual abuse to adult psychological adjustment. Child Abuse &Neglect, 19, 715-728.King, N., Tonge, B., Mullen, P., Myerson, N., Heyne, D., Rollings, S.,et al. (2000). Treating sexually abused children with posttrau-matic stress symptoms: A randomized clinical trial. Journal ofthe American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 39,1347-1355.Lipsey, M. W. (1998). Design sensitivity: Statistical power forapplied experimental research. In. L. Bickman & D. J. Rog
(Eds.), Handbook of applied social research methods (pp. 39-70).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Loeber, S. M., Loeber, R., Wei, E., Farrington, D. P., & Wikstrom,P.- O. H. (2002). Risk and promotive effects in the explanation ofpersistent serious delinquency in boys. Journal of Consulting andClinical Psychology, 70, 111-123.Macdonald, G. M., Higgins, J. P. T., & Ramchandani, P. (2006).Cognitive-behavioural interventions for children who have beensexually abused. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2006,Issue 4.Nash, M. R., Hulsey, T. L., Sexton, M. C., Harralson, T. L., & Lambert,W. (1993). Long-term sequelae of childhood sexual abuse: Perceivedfamily environment, psychopathology, and dissociation. Journal ofConsulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 276-283.Neumann, D., Houskamp, B., Pollock, V., & Briere, J. (1996). The long-term sequelae of sexual abuse in women. Child Maltreatment, 1, 6-16.Paolucci, E. O., Genuis, M. L., & Violato, C. (2001). A meta-analysis of the published research on the effects of child sexualabuse. The Journal of Psychology, 135(1), 17-36.Peters, S. D. (1988). Child sexual abuse and later psychologicalproblems. In G. E. Wyatt & G. J. Powell (Eds.), Lasting effects ofchild sexual abuse (pp. 101-117). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.Putnam, F. (2003). Ten-year research update review: Child sexualabuse. Journal of the American Academy of Child & AdolescentPsychiatry, 42, 269-278.Raudenbush, S. W. (1994). Random effects models. In H. Cooper& L. V. Hedges (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis(pp. 301-322). New York: Russell Sage.Saunders, B., Berliner, L., & Hanson, R. (Eds.). (2003). Child phys-ical and sexual abuse: Guidelines for treatment (Final Report:January 15, 2003). Charleston, SC: National Crime VictimsResearch and Treatment Center. Retrieved March 23, 2005,  K., Mannarino, A., Berliner, L., & Cohen, J. (2000). Treatmentfor sexually abused children and adolescents. American Psycholo-gist, 55, 1040-1049.Tufts New England Medical Center, Division of Child Psychiatry.(1984). Sexually exploited children: Service and research project(Final Report for the Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention, U.S. Department of Justice). Boston: Author.Wind, T. W., & Silvern, L. (1994). Parenting and family stress asmediators of the long-term effects of child abuse. Child Abuse &Neglect, 18, 439-453.Wolfe, V. V. (1998). Child sexual abuse. In E. J. Mash & R. A. Barkley(Eds.), Treatment of childhood disorders (2nd ed., pp. 545-597).New York: Guilford.Wolfe, V. V., & Birt, J. A. (1997). Child sexual abuse. In E. J. Mash& L. G. Terdal (Eds.), Assessment of childhood disorders (3rded., pp. 569-626). New York: Guilford.Wyatt, G. E., & Mickey, M. R. (1987). Ameliorating the effects ofchild sexual abuse: An exploratory study of support by parentsand others. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 2, 403-414.
