Professional doctorates and nursing practice contribution:a systematic literature search and descriptive synthesisNANCY-JANE SMITH P h D , M A , B A ( H o n s ) , C e r t E d , D P S N , R G NAssociate Head of School, International, University of Salford, School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work,Salford, Greater Manchester, UKIntroductionThis paper explores the professional doctorate as anagent for nurses personal and professional develop-ment. The aim is to understand better the relationshipbetween professional doctorate study and its researchoutcomes in the professional nursing context. Theemergent themes are derived from a systematic litera-ture search and synthesis. The professional doctoratesnursing origins are first explored and located withinCorrespondenceNancy-Jane SmithUniversity of SalfordSchool of NursingMidwifery and Social WorkFrederick Road CampusSalford M6 6PUGreater ManchesterUKE-mail: SMIT H N.-J. (2012) Journal of Nursing ManagementProfessional doctorates and nursing practice contribution: a systematicliterature search and descriptive synthesis
Aim To understand how professional doctorates contribute to nursing practice.Background Professional doctorate philosophies espouse the integration of researchwith the practitioner researchers practice milieu. It is timely to appraise this and toilluminate the implications for nurse managers and leaders.Evaluation Five databases were searched for papers with explicit methodologiespublished between January 2005 and May 2012. Descriptive synthesis was appliedto identify emergent themes.Key issues Enhanced understanding of nursing practice and insight into factorsinfluencing care management are professional doctorate outcomes. Changes tonursing practice are more difficult to extrapolate. Professional doctorates facilitateprofessional legitimization and empowerment for practitioner researchers. Colle-giate study and peer networking opportunities within professional doctorates mayindirectly influence practice development.Conclusion Better understanding of the nursing context is an outcome of profes-sional doctorate study.Implications for nursing management Managers are pivotal to the translation ofresearch into practice and their role requires exploration. Good practice shouldbe disseminated whereby there is an interface between the nurse manager, thepractitioner researcher and academics, before, during and after the professionaldoctorate. Nurse managers need to appreciate the range of doctoral programmesavailable to match staff aspirations and learning preferences with organizationalpriorities.Keywords: practice development, practitioner research, professional doctoratesAccepted for publication: 18 May 2012Journal of Nursing Management, 2012
nursing practice. The strategy employed for the sys-tematic literature search and synthesis is described withcritical review of the findings. The implications fornursing management and leadership are discussed.The professional doctorate is emerging as a populardoctoral route for senior practising nurses with priorprofessional experience who wish to develop and utilizeresearch from and for the practice setting, as opposed tothe pursuit of research for academic career development(Lee 2009). Such popularity reflects the wider discus-sion of professional doctorates for nursing and healthcare practitioners, and their emphasis upon researchundertaken by professional practitioners for develop-ment and utilization directly within their practice set-tings(Smithet al.2011).Professionaldoctoratedevelopment for nurses is evident in the United King-dom (UK) Australia and the United States (USA)(AACN 2004, Yam 2005, Ellis 2007, Fell et al. 2011).Professional doctorate uptake amongst nurses reflectstrends across diverse subjects (Costley & Stephenson2008). While some professional doctorates in the UK,for example clinical psychology, have specific profes-sional regulatory requirements, their development innursing has been piecemeal by contrast, and somewould say populist.For example Kirkman et al. (2007; 65) suggest thedevelopment of professional doctorates in the UK hasbeen a pragmatic response to market forces on the part ofhigher education institutions; to make a fast buck.Dreher and Smith-Glasgow (2011) presciently explorethe professional doctorate compared with the PhD, ask-ing if it is considered a watered down PhD. Edwards(2009) questions the claims made regarding the profes-sional doctorates interface with the role of the practi-tioner researcher and their practice context, suggestingthat it will be increasingly difficult to justify funding forsuch study without evidence of practice impact andcontribution. Within this paper the aim is to appraise theprofessional doctorate from a different stance, that ofsystematic literature search and synthesis.Individuals undertaking professional doctorate studyand/or involved in programme development and deliv-ery should not be defensive of the critical perspectivesabove. On the one hand, debate is important to enhancequality. Alternatively, critique can create dissonanceand deflect focus from evaluation of the professionaldoctorate and its underpinning philosophy: practicecontribution. For example it has been suggested thatprofessional doctorate study is grounded within thestudent practitioner researchers utilization of researchinquiry, combined with their significant understandingof, and engagement in, professional practice to investi-
gate challenges and curiosities; to understand, informand influence professional practice. This grounding isillustrated within professional doctorate definitions.The European University Association (EUA 2007; 14)states thatProfessional doctorates, or practice related doc-torates, are doctorates that focus on embeddingresearch in a reflective manner into another pro-fessional practice.The inter relationship between professional doctoratestudy and professional practice is arguably not unique tothe professional doctorate; as a PhD can also have aprofessional focus. Fell and Haines (2011; 13) endorsethis point with their view that there is some similarity inform and duration between the PhD and professionaldoctorate. For example, both are studied within the sametime frames and PhDs, in the UK at least, have modularcomponents as part of their overall research trainingrequirements. However, the authors suggest that themodular components within the professional doctorateare related to the acquisition of professional knowledgeand skills as part of the doctoral research journey and arelikely to have a greater taught or facilitated weightingwithin a professional doctorate compared with the PhD.This professional position is explicit within the EuropeanUniversity Association (2007) definition above, withdoctoral learning, research and development aligned to aprofessional setting.The location and focus for professional doctoratestudy is further explored by the Quality AssuranceAgency for Higher Education/QAA (2011), which de-tails the requirement of originality and contribution ofknowledge within all forms of UK doctorate whilstilluminating the position of the professional doctorate:In professional and practice-based doctorates theresearch may be undertaken in the workplace andso have a direct effect on organisational policyandchange,aswellasimprovingpersonalpractice.(QAA 2011; 2)
TheAustralianQualificationsFramework/AQF(2011) meanwhile relates doctoral studies to originalityand contribution within an overarching framework,identifying the Doctoral Degree (Research) or PhD asmaking an original contribution to knowledge, whilethe Doctoral Degree (Professional) makes an originalcontribution to professional knowledge.In summary it could be suggested that professionaldoctorates for nurses and other health disciplines have adistinct preparatory modular or facilitated component,credit or non credit bearing, concerned with researchtraining and related professional expertise to underpinresearch development and application within the pro-fessional practice setting. Further, the professionaldoctorate is concerned with the development of originalprofessional knowledge and/or skills through the use ofresearch methods to inform and influence professionalpractice. Further distinction is potentially challengingpending more detailed evaluation of professional doc-torate process and outcomes. As Fulton et al. (2012;131) state:
It is tempting to conceptualise the PhD and pro-fessional doctorate as distinct entities, but thereality is much more complex.The first nursing professional doctorate in the UK isattributed to the Doctor of Nursing Science programmeat Ulster University, 1994. This was described by McK-enna and Cutcliffe (2001) as an early example of doctoralstudy resonant with nursing practice; the doctoral stu-dent as practitioner researcher employing researchstrategies applicable to the practice setting to generateknowledge and expertise for application in that setting.In Australia, meanwhile, the professional doctoratesexpansion within higher education during the 1990swas described as a pragmatic response to governmentand employer calls for doctoral programmes resonantwiththecompetitiveness,commercializationandknowledge transfer ensuing from global economies andemployment needs (Kemp 2004). Pearson et al. (2008)maintained this theme and described an upward trendin doctoral studies within a range of professional dis-ciplines including nursing. In the USA early doctoralstudy opportunities for nurses were linked to an edu-cation doctorate, EdD, at Columbia University in 1924(Robb 2005). The diverse nursing doctoral programmesin the USA have been discussed by Brar et al. (2010)and the complexity of the US doctoral repertoire is notthe focus for discussion here. That said, Grace (1978)identified three significant phases within nursing doc-torate development in the USA. The first phase from the1920s to the 1950s is attributed to the preparation offaculty staff for education roles. The second phaseduring the 1960s enabled the development of nursing asa science with the exploration and development ofnursing theory. The third phase focused upon doctoralstudy to inform the practice of nursing (Grace 1978).Cronenwett et al. (2011) describe the introduction ofthe nursing practice focused doctoral degree, or pro-fessional/clinical doctorate as opposed to the EdD above,
in 1979 at Case Western Reserve University. Further, theauthors state that in 2004 there were eight clinical doc-torate programmes nationally in the USA prior to theAACN (2004) position statement concerning the Doctorof Nursing Practice (DNP). Hathaway et al. (2006; 487)describe the DNP as a disruptive innovation, and thisdescription possibly resonates with the professionaldoctorate. The DNP emerged from a position statementby the American Association of Colleges of Nursing(2004), that nurses engaged in advanced nursing practi-tioner roles should be educated to doctoral as opposedto masters level. This prompted debate regarding theDNP as preparation for advanced nursing practitionerroles, its relationship with nursing research and theimpact of this shift upon nursing workforce planning andeducation (Meleis & Dracup 2005, Miller 2008).Locating the professional doctorate withinnursing practice
Several explanations have been offered to underpin thegrowth in professional doctorate provision for practis-ing professionals. For example, Neumann (2005) sug-gests that the professional doctorates adoption in arange of subject disciplines in Australia was linked tothe expedient need for a wider pool of professionalswith advanced research skills from which to recruitacademic staff. Furthermore the author argues that theageing academic workforce and related shortfall infaculty staff have influenced professional doctoratedevelopment. Within the UK it has been suggested thatnursing role and doctoral development are interwovenwith the New Labour health policies and politics of the1990s. The growing impetus for evidence-based prac-tice, the expansion and adaptation of senior nursingroles and the policy and practice demands facing clini-cians, managers and leaders are suggested catalysts forprofessional doctorate development (Galvin & Carr2003, Ellis & Lee 2005, Yam 2005, Edwards 2009,Fulton et al. 2012). In contrast Jolley (2007) suggeststhat nurses seek professional doctorate study for per-sonal confidence, empowerment and self-affirmationand not simply as a reaction to policy developments.It is perhaps not surprising that the practitioner re-searcher ethos implied within professional doctoratediscourse resonates with practising nurses, given thecentrality of evidence-based practice, role developmentand change within contemporary global nursing. Rolfeand Davies (2009) further locate professional doctoratedevelopment for nurses and nursing within a widerdissatisfaction with the PhD. Drawing upon the knowl-edge typology of Gibbons et al. (1994), they associate
Mode 1 knowledge, imparted within a university settingby a subject expert, with the PhD; metaphorically theresearcher as apprentice learning the craft of doctoralstudy from a skilled academic researcher. Within Gib-bons et al.s. (1994) typology, Mode 2 knowledge,according to Rolfe and Davies (2009), resonates with theprofessional doctorate; practice knowledge and expertisegenerated by the practitioner for the practice setting,facilitated by the academic as researcher, not imparted bythe academic as researcher. The intended outcome of theprofessional doctorate, suggest Rolfe and Davies (2009)should be emergent knowledge from the practice milieuitself for application within that setting. Fulton et al.(2012) locate the professional doctorate firmly within theMode 2 typology associated with practitioner researchand practice based knowledge.While there has been wider discussion of the PhD andsome dissatisfaction from the employer perspective,for example Kemp (2004), it is possibly difficult tolink such dissatisfaction to the situation of practisingnurses in the UK yet. According to Andalo (2005), 370nurses registered their doctoral thesis with the RoyalCollege of Nursing; a comparatively small number ofthe total nursing workforce. Modes of professionaldoctorate facilitation may be one reason for the pro-fessional doctorates popularity with nurses, however.Its framework of facilitated workshops, study days and/or taught modules as a precursor to the completion of adetailed research project may be popular with students.In addition study within a group or cohort may enablestudent peer support (Lee 2009).The systematic search and synthesis below seeks tobuild on current understanding of professional doctor-ates and their potential to enhance the development ofevidence-based nursing practice. Given contemporarydiscussion of the professional doctorate and its espousedpotential for the development of expertise and evidencederived from practice, through practitioner research,there is focus upon the professional doctorates contri-bution to nursing practice in this paper, and the impli-cations for nurse managers and leaders.Question: What do professional doctorates contrib-ute to nursing practice?
Key objectivesIn keeping with the overall question, the objectives ofthe systematic search and synthesis are:* To understand the professional doctorates rela-tionship with and implications for practising nurseprofessionals and/or nursing practice.* To determine the experience of practising nursesundertaking professional doctorates.* To consider whether the professional doctoratedoes/does not make a contribution to the advance-ment of nursing practice.MethodsPreliminary scoping of the nursing literature illuminatedcontemporary professional doctorate issues and helpedthe development of systematic literature search andsynthesis strategies. Definition and discussion of theprofessional doctorate (Yam 2005), exploration ofprofessionaldoctoratecharacteristicsandintendedoutcome (Ellis & Lee 2005), discussion of the pro-gramme relative to the PhD (Jolley 2007), Rolfe andDavies 2009) and strategies for professional doctoratesupervision were contemporary themes (Carr et al.2010).Within Ovid Full Text the terms professional doc-torates and nurses 2005-11, limited to social sciencesand arts and humanities yielded over six hundred ref-erences. This illustrates the challenges identified byDixon-Woods et al.(2006): diverseliteratureandmethodological approaches. For the purpose of thispaper there was a need to clarify the decision-makingprocess while enabling the filtering and management oflarge amounts of published material regarding profes-sional doctorates. The notion of sampling to developconceptual ideas as opposed to the inclusion and sum-mation of all data was invaluable (Dixon-Woods et al.2006).Framing the systematic review with a workingdefinitionInformed by the practice of Brettle et al. (2010) aworking definition of professional doctorates was usedto frame the systematic literature search and synthesisand the EUA (2007; 14) definition was adopted for thispurpose.
Inclusion* Research methodology or literature review strategyidentified within the paper.* Peer reviewed journal or professional doctoratethesis.* English language paper/professional doctorate thesisand full text electronically available.* Discussion of professional doctorate contributionfor practising nurses and/or nursing practice.N.-J. Smith* Discussion of nursing outcomes from professionaldoctorate study relevant to the clinical nursingcontext.* Discussion of personal/professional developmentoutcomes for nurse professionals practising in theclinical milieu.
Exclusion* Editorials,letters,bookreviews,oropinionpapers exploring philosophies, epistemologies orcharacteristics, scope or definition of professionaldoctorates.* Papers in press.* Theoretical or conceptual discussion of programmecharacteristics, scope and purpose.* Discussion of allied health professionals, socialwork or social care, or other professions not relatedto health care.The strategy for the systematic literature search isillustrated in Table 1. The literature was initially sear-ched between 2005 and August 2011 inclusive. A sec-ond search using Proquest took place in May 2012. Theyear 2005 was chosen to coincide with publication of aUKCGE study analysing the growth in professionaldoctorate programmes by title and subject (Powell& Long2005). Theelectronic search wascom-bined with scanning and hand searching of includedpublications.Filtering and paper selectionIn contrast to the number of discussion papers identifiedduring the preliminary literature scoping, a smallnumber of research papers and nursing professionaldoctorate theses were located when applying a system-atic literature search strategy. Some appeared in severalof the databases searched (Table 1). Following Brettleet al. (2010) the relevant papers were identified; firstreviewing paper titles and abstracts, followed by de-tailed assessment of the papers content using theinclusion and exclusion criteria. During this processsupervision was given by an experienced health infor-mation specialist to reduce selection bias as far aspossible.Search resultsFive research papers and three nursing professionaldoctorate theses were retained. A synthesis table wasdeveloped using an approach adapted from Ball et al.(2011) (Table 2). The professional doctorates contri-bution to nursing practice within each paper wasexplicated (Table 3).Data extractionThe works retained were not subjected to further ap-praisal of quality. On the one hand Dixon-Woods et al.(2006) argue that appraisal is integral to systematic
DatabaseSearch termsLimitsHitsRetainedScopusProfessional doctorates andnurses (in article, titleabstract, keywords)2005-4th August 2011Article or Reviewsubject area: Health sciences423Heinrich (2005)Ellis (2006)Loomis et al. (2005)Web of knowledgeProfessional doctorates(in topic)2005-4th August 2011Social sciencesRefined to subject area: NursingOvid onlineProfessional doctorates andnursing practice (in article,title abstract, keywords)2005-4th August 2011a. professional doctoratesb. nursing practicec. a and b2Carr & Galvin (2005)Ellis (2006)Ethos (British LibraryElectronic ThesesOnline Service)Professional doctorate andnursing, health2005-Aug 2011Limited to electronic access7422Clarke (2009)Forsyth (2010)Proquest: Dissertation & thesesProquest: Health & medicineProquest: Social scienceProfessional doctorates andnurses or nursingProfessional doctorates andnursing practice or nurses,nursingProfessional doctorates andnursing or nursing practiceand nurses2005-May 2012Doctoral Dissertation or ThesesEnglish languageFull text available2005-May 2012None1Bishop, Faithful & Allan (2011)Professional doctorates and nursing practice contributionreview of randomized controlled trials. They also sug-gest, however, that there is no equivalent hierarchy ofstudy design within qualitative approaches and there islittle consensus or agreement regarding the actual orpotentialbenefitsof appraisal. It was thought adescriptive approach would enable an initial perspectiveon professional doctorates and nursing contribution,while enabling identification of themes for future dis-cussion and development. The principles of descriptivesynthesis Lloyd-Jones (2007) were employed. Publishedstudies were described using narrative and summary,generally without interpreting the findings.Findings: professional doctorates and their nursingpractice contribution
The retained works considered professional doctoratesand nursing contribution in the USA (3) and the UK (4).One paper, Ellis (2006), analysed professional doctor-ate provision and student experience in Australia. Six ofthe retained works considered professional doctoratepractice contribution directly, and two, Ellis (2006) andCarr and Galvin (2005), evaluated professional doc-torate student experience and programme characteris-tics from a cohort perspective.The synthesis illustrated the varied doctorates availableto nurses and the diverse named doctoral awards; bothissues which have generated concern about professionaldoctorate quality (Kirkman et al. 2007) and wider cri-tique of professional doctorate purpose and character-istics (Fell et al. 2011, Smith et al. 2011). For example,a nursing doctorate, (Heinrich 2005), a clinical doc-torate (Bishop et al. 2011) an education doctorate(EdD), (Forsyth 2010, Moore 2010) and a doctorate inclinical psychology (DClinPsy) (Clarke 2009) wereidentified within the retained works. Ellis (2006) andCarr and Galvin (2005) used the term professionaldoctorate.The varied nomenclature is not in itself harmful,providing there is transparency, explanation of researchscope/doctoral purpose, and all papers provided thisdetail. Further, the varied doctorates illustrated withinthe synthesis are perhaps indicative of the demand for adoctoral skill mix in nursing, given its extensive reach,specialism and professional context. In essence one sizedoes not fit all. The doctoral diversity here is perhapsindicative of the originality and creativity requiredwithin all doctoral study that a uniform approach todoctoral structure, process and award may hinder.Further emergent themes from synthesis were under-standing nursing practice, recommendations to under-pin practice development, organizational role withinnursing practice contribution, professional legitimiza-tion, personal empowerment and collegiate study.Understanding nursing practice
Understandingpracticewithinalocalizedclinicalnursing or educational context was a key finding fromthe literature synthesis and was evident in all the re-tained works. This theme resonated with the widerprofessional doctorate literature that explores, forexample, the notion of the professional doctorate as avehicle for advanced work based learning, and devel-opment of practice (Fulton et al. 2012, Costley 2011).Further, understanding the factors influencing caremanagement, understanding how nurses practise andunderstanding education/learning needs for nursingpractice were illustrated. For example Clarke (2009)analysed the nursing contribution of specialist nursespractising within long term heart failure services. Inparticular, the palliative care needs of clients and theemergence of these needs relatively early in the caretrajectory, along with nurses perceptions of palliativecare were explored. Indeed the extent of palliative careappeared to be an unexpected feature of the nursingspecialism for the nurse participants within this study.Clarke also examined how nurses managed the emo-tional aspects of nursing care, through the developmentand application of a professional persona.As a further illustration of understanding nursingpractice contribution Forsyths (2010) doctoral thesiscritically appraised the contribution of communitymentalhealthnurses,particularlyfocusinguponunderstanding of the nursing assessment process andnurses perceptions and responses to patients/clientswith borderline personality disorder. This understandingunderpinned the development of a conceptual model fortherapeutic practice within mental health. While themodel was generated from a local nursing context therewas also the potential for its utilization within similarspecialist mental health care settings.Moore (2010) appraised the position of spiritualitywithin nursing practice, particularly the nurses pre-paredness or otherwise for this dimension of nursing.Comparatively little nursing research has focused onspiritual needs within nursing, so in this sense both to-pic and mode of study were interesting. For example,through exploration of nurses experiences of caring forpatients who had near death experiences and/or deathbed visions, further recommendations for professional
N.-J. SmithBishop et al. (2011)An exploration of the influenceson clinical decision making andthe culture of blood transfusionpractise in cancer related anae-mia using an ethnographicmethodologyEthnographyInterviews with nine medical andnursing staff and six patientsThe unimportance of anaemia, acknowledging uncertainty,Socialization in practice, disaggregation of the body.Difficult to determine significance of anaemia in the context of other condition relatedfactors, socialization to assessment and treatment of anaemia, interactional andsituational factors, training issues, decision making issues, understanding factorsinfluencing decision making, recommendations for professional practice.Carr and Galvin (2005)Doctoral preparation: Issues andrelevance for clinical leadersQuantitative andqualitative elementsA postal questionnaire to asample of UK consultant nursesn = 45SPSS for quantitative data,content analysis for openended questionsDiscussion of consultant nurse role development in the UKIdentification of key doctoral education factors; supportive study environment, peersupport, preparation for clinical research, research active department28% respondents would choose PhD, 53% would prefer professional doctorateFactors hindering doctoral study; volume of work in practice, funding, lack ofopportunity to apply skills in practiceA research and practice divideClarke (2009)A qualitative analysis of theexperience of heart failure spe-cialist nurses working withpatients with end stageheart failureSystematic literaturereviewQualitative researchCritical appraisal ofre-search process
Appraisal and synthesis ofpsychological impact on nursesof working within palliative careSemi structured interviews withend stage heart failure specialistnursesAnalysis using InterpretativePhenomenological AnalysisDevelopment of palliative care persona by nursesProfessional face to manage emotional impact of working with the dying, acute orcommunity care delivery, recommendations for training and supervision of nurses,inequities in health care provision, importance of bereavement visits,administrative needsDiscussion of research and its relationship with practice, learning aboutresearch management, qualitative data collection and analysis, new epistemologiesEllis (2006)The professional doctorate fornurses in Australia: Findings of ascoping exerciseIlluminative EvaluationPurposive sampling of curricula innational context, observation ofteaching, interviews withprofessional doctoratestudents n = 14In depth thematic content analysis(Morse 1994)
Students preferred professional doctorate; clinical focus, learning aboutresearch methodologies, collegiate learningDiscussion with manager about study time, little evidence of discussion relatingto application of research findingsProfessional doctorate as enabling professional credibility and equalityProfessional empowerment, research dissemination by respondentsLegitimisation of clinical leadership (more leadership requested in professionaldoctorate curriculumClarity of role and responsibility, clarity regarding research within practiceAspirations to improve nursing practice through researchFrustration about research funding, developing research capacityGate keeping, access, researching clinically sensitive issuesResearch supervisor critical within the study processConcern regarding professional doctorate credibilityForsyth (2010)Community mental health teamsconstruction of service users witha borderline personality disorder:An ethnographic studyEthnographyObservation, field notes, inter-views with nurses, reflectivejournalHow borderline personality disorder was assessed within one community mentalhealth team, enhanced understanding of nurses beliefs about borderline personalitydisorder, model for therapeutic engagement, strategies to combat stereotyping,improved therapeutic outcomes, service user responsibility and involvement in caremanagement and care delivery
Professional doctorates and nursing practice contributioneducation were made, and wider insights into spiritu-ality in nursing were offered.Recommendations to underpin practicedevelopmentWhile understanding nursing practice and providingcritical insight into how, where or why nurses, andother health disciplines, practise in a particular way in aparticular context, a further theme from synthesis re-lated to recommendations for practice development, asequel to understanding practice. For example, Clarke(2009) and Forsyth (2010) made recommendationsabout education and training to up-skill nurses and toenhance care quality. Both explore service improvementand wider organizational and professional issues relatedto care management and care delivery. Bishop et al.(2011) explored the clinical decision making of healthprofessionals working in oncology settings, comparingand critiquing their perspectives relating to the assess-ment and management of patients with anaemia. Thisstudy illustrated an understanding of nursing practiceand made recommendations regarding education andtraining to enable consistency of approach for caremanagement, as opposed to practice influenced bysocialization. Uniquely, the authors also included theperspectives of service users and patients, enabling a360 degree perspective about anaemia, clinical decision-making and patient impact.
Organizational role within nursing practicecontributionThe synthesis illuminated an important issue related toorganizational support during doctoral study and therole of the organization in postdoctoral application andutilization of research findings. While this theme did notdescribe a direct nursing practice contribution emergentfrom professional doctorate study, the implications forevidence-basedpractice,practitionerresearchandMode 2 knowledge (Rolfe and Davies 2009) are sig-nificant. For example, the centrality of practice as thelocation for professional doctorate study focus is evi-dent in the professional doctorate literature (UKCGE2002, UKCGE 2005, Yam 2005, Ellis & Lee 2005).Given this centrality it could be expected that organi-zations, which have possibly sponsored doctoral study,would have involvement within the study process itselfand the translation of research findings into practice. Incontrast, however, it would appear that researchdevelopment and application were incidental within therole of the practitioner researcher, even where theAuthor(s), date, titleResearch approachData collection and data analysisKey findingsHeinrich (2005)Halfway between receiving andgiving: A relational analysis ofdoctorate preparednurse-scholars first 5 yearsafter graduationFeminist,phenomenologicalinquiry, longitudinalstudyInterviews with a conveniencesample of 16 women from thefirst cohort of a doctorate innursing, over a 5 year periodInsight into career trajectories; education, administration, in service education,in service administration, research.Demographic and professional characteristics of the group, role and self identifyfollowing doctoral study; hidden identity in service with doctoral award publicisedand used selectively, contrast to assumed identity in the education settingUse of doctorate for career planning and focus, doctoral identityLoomis, Willard & Cohen (2006)Difficult professional choices:Deciding between the PhD andthe DNP in nursing
Exploratory surveyOnline survey administered tostudents undertaking DNPn = 69, 18% response rateNomenclature: practice doctorate, clinical doctorate, professional doctorate,practice rather than research focusSome participants transferred from PhD to DNPPrimary interest excellence in clinical nursing, credible clinical leadership,application of research in the practice areasSome desire to integrate teaching role with practice roleMoore (2010)Perceptions of nursing facultytoward near death experiencesand death bed visionsQuantitative and quali-tativeElectronic survey, 571participantsDefinition of near death experiences and death bed visions, examination of nursesexperiences of caring for patients in this contextDiscussion of spirituality in contemporary nursing practiceRecommendations for nurse education to enhance nurses skills to meetspiritual needs of patients and othersUnderstanding of a little discussed concept in nursing
N.-J. Smithprofessional role of the practitioner researcher wouldhave required a research component (Carr & Galvin2005). Doctoral study may possibly have been consid-ered professional development for the benefit of theindividual practitioner researcher as opposed to thenursing team or wider organization. In summary re-search was outwith the practitioner role.For example, Ellis (2006) found that the practitionerresearchers as senior practising nurses had discussedtheir studies with their managers in the context of studytime and completion of the research. Research appli-cation, discussion of its consequences and/or organiza-tional dissemination was not evident. Carr and Galvin(2005) in their study of senior nurses also highlightedthe factors hindering research application in the pro-fessional context. For example service workload, lack offunding and little opportunity to utilize research skillspostdoctorate were identified in their evaluation ofprofessional doctorate studies. Clarke (2009) similarlydiscussed the challenges of research application within apractice context, highlighting learning about researchmanagement and the day-to-day challenges of carryingout research as key issues.Changes within the practice milieu were more diffi-cult to extrapolate from the synthesis. Arguably changeis a planned and measured process, and completion of
the professional doctorate is in itself a major achieve-ment, especially as a part time study option within thedemands of a challenging full time professional role.Longitudinal evaluation and case studies are required toexplore this issue further. While quality care manage-ment and delivery are priorities within all nursingservices, the role of nurses as researchers for evidence-based practice and the role of nurse managers as facil-itators of evidence-based practice requires development.From this synthesis it would appear there is scope fornurse managers and leaders in the practice context tofacilitate the professional doctorate student as an agentfor change using coaching and/or mentorship strategies.This would extend current good practices wherebypractice staff engage with the professional doctoratestudent in the learning context through the researchsupervision process (Carr et al. 2010). Even better,some programmes require partnerships between thepractitioner researcher, the academic and practiceenvironments (Stephenson et al. 2006).
Legitimization of professional role emerged from syn-thesis as a strong indicator for professional nursingcontributionresultingfromprofessionaldoctoratestudy. Arguably professionals with a strong sense ofprofessional autonomy, worth and credibility are wellplaced to apply such professional efficacy within thepractice setting. Professional legitimization illustratedthe desire of the professional doctorate student to act asan agent for positive change due to enhanced profes-sional credibility and/or personal confidence as a studyoutcome (Carr & Galvin 2005, Heinrich 2005, Loomiset al. 2006, Ellis 2006). Fulton et al. (2012; 134) use thenotion of professional identity to explore the combi-nation of professional experience, tacit knowledge,values and beliefs which, they argue, have the potentialfor development, learning and change through profes-sional doctorate study. Professional legitimization andits interface with professional doctorate study has alsobeen reported in other disciplines. Wellington and Sikes(2006), for example, analysed the reasons why studentsundertook an education doctorate. Self-actualization,career achievement and satisfaction from the doctoralstudy process were themes. This was especially impor-tant as some of the students were the first in theirfamilies to achieve doctoral success. Specific to nursing,Ketefian (2008) identified the importance of doctoralstudy per se for the development of professionalautonomy and leadership. Loomis et al. (2006) foundthat participants in their survey wanted to combineUnderstanding practiceUnderstanding local contextFactors influencing care managementUnderstanding professional decision makingHow nurses practiseUnderstanding learning needsConceptual model development to inform professional practice
Recommendations to underpin practice developmentEducation and training needs identifiedExploration of professional and clinical decision makingOrganizational role within practice contributionResearch within practitioner rolesIndividual or organizational benefit from doctoral studyOrganizational focus upon study managementLack of clarity regarding research translationFactors hindering research translation in practicePersonal empowermentSelf-confidence and esteemCollegiate studyImpact of peer support and learningPeer networks and coachingProfessional doctorates and nursing practice contributionpractice knowledge and leadership with a teaching role.Meanwhile Ellis (2006) found that Australian studentsengaged in nursing professional doctorates had strongmotivation to enhance their clinical credibility andnursing leadership through doctoral study. Credibleleadership and professional legitimization were alsoidentified by Loomis et al. (2006).Collegiate studyThe final theme within the synthesis, while not directlyindicative of professional doctorate practice contribu-tion per se has the potential indirectly to influencepractice contribution. For example, the process ofprofessional doctorate study was considered flexibleand collegiate, suitable for nurses in the clinical context(Carr & Galvin 2005, Loomis et al. 2006, Ellis 2006).A supportive learning environment in the company oflike minded practitioner researchers could possibly en-hance the success of doctoral study and indirectly en-hance the practice contribution through peer support,mentoring and knowledge exchange. Such attributesresonate with the conceptual model of communities ofpractice (Lave & Wenger 1991) and have been com-mented upon elsewhere within the professional doc-torate discourse (Fulton et al. 2012).
Summary of the findingsappear that professional doctorate study can enable thepractising nurse professional to understand and reflectupon nursing practice and wider nursing issues. Exam-ples of understanding included insight into professionaldecision-making processes and the development of aconceptual framework to underpin nursing practice.From this understanding recommendations regardingpractice development can be made, and such recom-mendations may relate to education and training needs.From this review, examples of understanding includedknowledge and insight related to the factors that mayhelp or hinder care delivery and the strategic manage-ment of care. Further, there were examples of how thecare experience could impact upon the professionalpersona. Reflection upon nursing practice presentedsome interesting findings about the personal impact ofprofessional doctorate study. Confidence, credibilityamongst peers and a sense of empowerment were sig-nificantly represented as positive outcomes of profes-sional doctorate study for nurse professionals.
Implications for nursing managersDreher and Smith-Glasgow (2011; 403) suggest in theirdiscussionofprofessionaldoctoratesthat,theresearching professional should be the leader in gener-atingpracticebasedevidenceleadingtopracticeknowledge. The findings from this systematic literaturesearch and synthesis illustrate several implications fornursing managers and professional doctorate students ifleadership of research in practice is to be truly achievedfrom professional doctorate study. First, nurse manag-ers need an understanding of the doctoral diversityavailable within nursing, to map and balance thepractitioner researchers professional doctorate aspira-tions, learning preferences and research interests withorganizational strategies and needs. In essence jointdiscussion and collaboration to explore which doctoralprogrammes, intended doctoral outcomes, linked topersonal and professional development is required atthe outset to ensure support strategies are in placefor the professional doctorate student. Early discussionhas the potential to better align the doctoral focus withorganizational and specific clinical nursing needs, toconsider the feasibility of study and to identify the re-sources required. Carr and Galvin (2005) and Ellis(2006) are indicative of some of the challenges forprofessional doctorate students, which wider involve-ment and engagement from within practice could helpto address. While nurse managers are central to thisprocess doctoral programme leaders also have profes-sional and ethical responsibilities to engage activelyN.-J. Smith
with the practitioner researcher and, critically, theirprofessional environment and support networks. Whilethis may appear to be a time consuming process on onehand, lack of communication and discussion beforedoctoral study commences have the potential to hinderthe study process and outcome (Ellis 2006). Studentattrition and lengthy doctoral completion rates arearguably more expensive for stakeholders; the practiceorganization, the doctoral student, the academic insti-tution and in the final analysis health service users.The organizational role within professional doctoratestudy requires further consideration and exemplars ofgood practice should be built upon, for example theinterface between the professional context, the practi-tioner researcher and the academic environment as de-scribed by Stephenson et al. (2006). This is not to shift thelocus of control from the practitioner researcher to theorganization; however, a collaborative approach before,during and after doctoral study is required. The widerorganizational relationship with and support of thepractitioner researcher undertaking the professionaldoctorate is critical to practice contribution and positivepractice development. Following professional doctoratestudy there is an important need for nurse managers tobetter support the translation of research into the practicecontext and to support the development of postdoctoralresearch skills; a responsibility also aligned to the researchsupervisors role. It is suggested that nurse managerscannot do this in isolation, and the good practice of tri-partite support between professional doctorate student,supervisorandpracticecontextcouldbe extendedintothepostdoctoral study period, so that understanding ofpractice can be translated further into development ofpractice. For example, developing or even maintainingresearch skills was a key concern for nurse participantsfrom this synthesis (Ellis 2006, Carr & Galvin 2005).There are wider implications for nurse managers andacademics. Moving from discussion of what the profes-sional doctorate is within nursing, to an examination ofhow nurses can be facilitated in practice before, duringand after the study process, should underpin the nextphase of professional doctorate and wider doctoraldevelopment in nursing. This is pressing in the context ofglobal socio-economic challenges that will influencenursing practice. There is also potential for nurse man-agers and leaders to betterexplore and explicate what theyneed from the professional doctorate to enhance nursingleadership. How leadership skills can be integrated withresearch skill acquisition is an important precursor toachieving Ketefians (2008) aim of excellence in nursingleadership through doctoral education. Professionallegitimacy and empowerment warrant further explora-
tion of the nursing management and/or leadership strate-giesrequired to support their achievement within practice.Limitations of the systematic literature search andsynthesisWhile every attempt has been made to explain the deci-sion-making processes within this paper there are severallimitations. The key search terms employed emphasizedprofessional doctorate/doctoral contribution to nursing.However, published papers that detail practice contri-bution and that do not necessarily make reference to themode of doctoral study will be available. For exampleBishop et al. (2011) identified the clinical doctoratestudy within the papers acknowledgements.The interchangeable nomenclature within the papersretained reflected doctoral diversity in nursing andillustrated the wider professional doctorate discourseregarding programme characteristics and purpose (Fellet al. 2011). This is especially interesting in relation todiscussion of the DNP in the USA, which may not haveequivalenceinotherregions.Carewithdoctoralnomenclature is required to inform evaluation of nurs-ing doctorates. This is especially so within an interna-tional context where definitions may not translate soeasily within different countries or regions.Conclusion
This paper has aimed to evidence the claims made forprofessional doctorates and their relationship withpractitioner research and practice contribution. Further,some examples of practice insights and contributionhave been made based upon a systematic literaturesearch and synthesis, and drawing upon internationalperspectives in nursing.There were three key objectives within this systematicliterature search and synthesis: to identify the profes-sional doctorates interface with practising nursingprofessionals and wider nursing practice; to explorenursesexperiencesofprofessionaldoctorates;tounderstand how the professional doctorate can con-tribute to nursing practice. Several key themes havebeen identified: doctoral variety, understanding of thepractice context, recommendations for practice devel-opment, the organizations role within professionaldoctorate studies; professional and personal empower-ment and strategies for postdoctoral support anddevelopment. This paper has illuminated the ethos ofthe professional doctorate and its potential for thepractitioner researcher to generate and apply knowl-edge and expertise from practice, for practice withinProfessional doctorates and nursing practice contributionpractice (Rolfe and Davies 2009). Further evaluativestudies are required and there should be wider consid-eration of the practice context as a learning experiencefor doctoral and postdoctoral students.Source of fundingThis work has not received any external funding fromgrant awarding bodies or other agencies. There is noconflict of interest.References
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (2004) PositionStatement on the Practice Doctorate in Nursing. AACN,Washington DC.Andalo D. (2005) Going the extra mile. Nursing Management12 (7), 20-22.AQF (2011) Australian Qualifications Framework First EditionAQF Council for the Ministerial Council for Tertiary Educa-tion and Employment. Available at:  1 May 2012.Ball E., McLoughlin M. & Darvill A. (2011) Plethora or paucity:a systematic search and bibliometric study of the applicationand design of qualitative methods in nursing research 2008-2010. Nurse Education Today 31 (3), 299-303.Bishop L., Faithfull S. & Allan H. (2011) An exploration of theinfluences on clinical decision making and the culture of bloodtransfusionpractiseincancerrelated anaemia usinganethnographic methodology. Supportive Care in Cancer 19,203-210.Brar K., Boschma G. & McGuaig F. (2010) The development ofnurse practitioner preparation beyond the Masters level: whatis the debate about? International Journal of Nursing EducationScholarship 7 (1) Article 9. DOI: 10.2202/1548-923x.1928.Brettle A., Maden-Jenkins M., Anderson L. et al. (2010) Evalu-ating clinical librarian services: a systematic review. HealthInformation and Libraries Journal 28, 3-22.Carr E.C.J. & Galvin K.T. (2005) Doctoral preparation: issuesand relevance for clinical leaders. Journal of Research inNursing 10 (6), 601-624.Carr S.M., Lhussier M. & Chandler C. (2010) The supervision ofprofessional doctorates: experiences of the processes and waysforward. Nurse Education Today 30, 279-284.Clarke L.M. (2009) A qualitative analysis of the experiences ofheart failure specialist nurses working with patients with endstage heart failure. Doctoral Thesis. Available at:  accessed on 30 August 2011.Costley C. (2011) Professional doctorates and the doctorate of pro-fessional studies. In Professional Doctorates in the U.K. 2011(T. Fell, K. Flint & I. Haines eds), pp. 20-27. UKCGE, Lichfield.Costley C. & Stephenson J. (2008) Building doctorates aroundindividual candidates professional experience. In ChangingPractices of Doctoral Education (D. Boud & A. Lee eds),pp. 171-183. Routledge, London.
Cronenwett L., Dracup K., Grey M., McCauley L., Meleis A. &Salmon M. (2011) The doctor of nursing practice: a nationalworkforce perspective. Nursing Outlook 59, 9-17.Dixon-Woods M., Cavers D., Agarwal S. et al. (2006) Conduct-ing a critical interpretive synthesis of the literature on access tohealth care by vulnerable groups. BMC Medical ResearchMethodology 6, 35.Dreher H.M. & Smith-Glasgow M.E. (2011) Global perspectiveson the professional doctorate. International Journal of NursingStudies 48 (4), 403-408.Edwards S. (2009) A professional practice-based doctorate:developing advanced nursing practice. Nurse Education Today29 (1), 1-4.Ellis L.B. (2006) The professional doctorate for nurses inAustralia: findings of a scoping exercise. Nurse EducationToday 26 (6), 484-493.Ellis L.B. (2007) Academics perceptions of the professional orclinical doctorate: findings of a national survey. Journal ofClinical Nursing 16, 2272-2279.Ellis L.B. & Lee N. (2005) The changing landscape of doctoraleducatio: introducing the professional doctorate for nurses.Nurse Education Today 25, 222-229.European University Association (2007) Doctoral programmes inEurope: Bologna follow up group report. p14. Available at: accessed 1 May 2012.Fell T. & Haines I. (2011) Introduction. In Professional Doc-torates in the U.K. in 2011(T. Fell, K. Flint & I. Haines eds),pp. 11-19. UKCGE, Lichfield.Fell T., Flint K. & Haines I. (2011) Professional Doctorates in theUK in 2011. UKCGE, Lichfield.Forsyth A.S. (2010) Community Mental Health Teams construc-tions of service users with a diagnosis of Borderline PersonalityDisorder: an ethnographic study. Doctoral Thesis. Available at: accessed 30 August 2011.Fulton J., Kuit J., Sanders G. & Smith P. (2012) The role of theProfessional Doctorate in developing professional practice.Journal of Nursing Management 20, 130-139.Galvin K.T. & Carr E. (2003) The emergence of professionaldoctorates in nursing in the UK: where are we now? NursingTimes Research 8 (4), 293-307.Gibbons M., Limoges C., Nowotony H., Schwartzman S., Scott P.& Trow M. (1994) The New Production of Knowledge: TheDynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies.Sage, London.Grace H. (1978) The development of doctoral education innursing: an historical perspective. Journal of Nursing Educa-tion 17 (4), 17-27.Hathaway D., Jacob S., Stegbauer C., Thompson C. & Graff C.(2006) The practice doctorate: perspectives of early adopters.Nursing Education 45 (12), 487-496.Heinrich K.T. (2005) Halfway between receiving and giving: arelational analysis of doctorate prepared nurse-scholars first5 years after graduation. Journal of Professional Nursing21 (5), 303-313.Jolley J. (2007) Choose your doctorate. Journal of ClinicalNursing 16, 225-233.Kemp S. (2004) Professional doctorates and doctoral education.InternationalJournalofOrganisationalBehaviour7(4),401-410.Ketefian S. (2008) Doctoral education in the context of interna-tional development strategies. International Journal of NursingStudies 45, 1401-1402.
N.-J. SmithKirkman S., Thompson D.R., Watson R. & Stewart S. (2007) Areall doctorates equal or are some more equal than others?Nurse Education in Practice 7 (2), 61-66.Lave J. & Wenger E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate PeripheralParticipation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Lee N.J. (2009) Achieving Your Professional Doctorate. OpenUniversity Press/McGraw Hill, Buckingham.Lloyd-Jones M. (2007) An overview of methods, Chapter 6. InReviewing Research Evidence for Nursing Practice, SystematicReviews(C. Webb & B. Roe eds), pp. 61-70. Blackwell, Oxford.Loomis J.A., Willard B. & Cohen J. (2006) Difficult professionalchoices: deciding between the PhD and the DNP in nursing. TheOnline Journal of Issues in Nursing 12 (1), 6.McKenna H. & Cutcliffe J. (2001) Nursing doctoral education inthe United Kingdom and Ireland. The Online Journal of Issuesin Nursing5 (2). Available at:  30 November 2003.Meleis A.L. & Dracup K. (2005) The case against the DNP:history, timing, substance and marginalisation. Online Journalof Issues in Nursing 10 (3). Available at: , accessed on 30 August 2011.Miller J. (2008) The doctor of nursing practice: recognising a needor graying the line between doctor and nurse? MedscapeJournal of Medicine 10 (11), 253.Moore L. (2010) Perceptions of nursing faculty toward near deathexperiences and death bed visions. EdD Thesis. Texas A & MUniversity Corpus Christi, Texas.Neumann R. (2005) Doctoral differences: professional doctoratesand PhDs compared. Journal of Higher Education Policy andManagement 27 (2), 173-188.
Pearson M., Evans T. & McCauley P. (2008) Growth anddiversityindoctoraleducation:assessingtheAustralianexperience. Higher Education 55 (3), 357-372.Powell S. & Long E. (2005) Professional Doctorate Awards in theUK. UKCGE, Dudley.QAA (2011) Doctoral degree characteristics. Available at: , accessed 1 May 2012.Robb W.J.W. (2005) PhD, DNSc, ND The ABCs of nursingdoctoral degrees. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing 24 (2),89-96.Rolfe G. & Davies R. (2009) Second generation professionaldoctorates in nursing. International Journal of Nursing Studies46, 1265-1273.Smith P., Curtis H., Sanders G., Kuit J. & Fulton J. (2011) Stu-dent perceptions of the professional doctorate. Work BasedLearning ejournal 2(1). Available at: ,accessed 30 November 2011.Stephenson J., Malloch M. & Cairns L. (2006) Managing theirown programme: a case study of the first graduates of a newkind of doctorate in professional practice. Studies in Contin-uing Education 28 (1), 17-32.UKCGE (2002) Professional Doctorates. UKCGE, Dudley.UKCGE (2005) Professional doctorate awards in the UK,UKCGE, Dudley.Wellington J. & Sikes P. (2006) A doctorate in a tight compart-ment: why do students choose a professional doctorate andwhat impact does it have on their personal and professionallives? Studies in Higher Education 31 (6), 723-734.Yam B. (2005) Professional doctorates and professional nursingpractice. Nurse Education Today 25(7), 564-572.Professional doctorates and nursing practice contribution
