REVIEWWhat is the existing evidence supporting the efficacy of compressionbandage systems containing both elastic and inelastic components(mixed-component systems)? A systematic reviewLynn Welsh
Aims and objectives. To analyse current evidence on the efficacy of bandagesystems containing both elastic and inelastic components (mixed-componentsystems).Background. International consensus on the efficacy of types of compression sys-tems is difficult to achieve; however, mixed-component systems are being pro-moted as combining the best properties of both elastic and inelastic bandagesystems and increasingly being used to treat venous leg ulcers in practice.Design. A systematic literature review.Methods. Search terms such as venous leg ulcer, varicose ulcer, leg ulcer, com-pression, bandage, elastic, inelastic, short stretch, healing rate, interface pressure,mixed component, two-layer, four-layer and multi-layer were used in databaseand hand searches in several combinations. Limits were set for years 2005-March2015 and English-language publications.Results. A total of 475 studies were identified at initial search, and followingelimination from abstract and title, this was reduced to 7. A further study wasidentified on Google Scholar, bringing the final number of studies fitting inclusioncriteria to 8. The following subgroups relating to outcomes of efficacy were iden-tified: ulcer healing, maintenance of interface pressure, slippage, ease of applica-tion and patient quality of life.Conclusions. Mixed-component systems were found to have comparable ulcerhealing rates to alternative compression systems and be easy to apply; have simi-lar abilities to maintain pressure as four-layer bandages and better abilities thanshort-stretch bandages; have less slippage than alternative systems; and to be sig-nificantly associated with several favourable quality of life outcomes. Clinicianskill in bandage application was an uncontrolled variable in all eight papersincluded in the review, which may limit reliability of findings.Relevance to clinical practice. This review synthesises existing evidence on theefficacy of mixed-component systems and encourages clinicians to regard them asan effective alternative to purely elastic or inelastic compression systems. Addi-tionally, it highlights the importance of clinician skill in bandage application as acrucial determinant of effective compression.
What does this paper contributeto the wider global clinicalcommunity?* Synthesises evidence of mixed-component systems as an effec-tive alternative to compressionbandagesystemscontainingpurely elastic or inelastic compo-nents.* Raisesawarenessofneedtoupdate bandage classification sys-tems and international consensusdocuments in compression ther-apy.* Raisesawarenessofclinicianskill as an important determinantof effective compression therapyand identifies clinician skill as aconfounding variable in existingevidenceoncompressionther-apy.Author: Lynn Welsh, BSc, MSc, MA, Lecturer in Nursing, Univer-sity of the West of Scotland, Paisley, UKCorrespondence: Lynn Welsh, Lecturer in Nursing, University ofthe West of Scotland, Room A418, Paisley PA1 2BE, UK. Tele-phone: +44 0141 849 4320.E-mail: LA (c) 2016 John Wiley & Sons LtdJournal of Clinical Nursing, 26, 1189-1203, doi: 10.1111/jocn.136111189Key words: literature review, quality of life, systematic review, venous leg ulcer,wound care
Accepted for publication: 24 September 2016IntroductionChronic venous insufficiency (CVI) is a progressive diseaseof the venous system, causing stasis and hypertension,oedema, skin changes and ulceration in the lower limbs. Ithas a significant impact on health-related quality of life(HRQoL) with up to 50% of the population being affected(Venous Forum of the Royal Society of Medicine et al.2011), and the burden and complexity of the disease isexpected to increase with changing demographics (Moffattet al. 2004). Graduated compression therapy has been thetreatment of choice since seminal research by Blair et al.(1988) pioneered its use in the 1980s. Despite a lack ofclaritysurroundingprecisephysiologicalfunctions,improved ulcer healing rates with the use of compressionare well evidenced (Harding et al. 2015). Bandage systemsmay be classified according to a variety of propertiesincluding material components (i.e. elastic, inelastic), num-ber of layers [two-layer (2LB), four-layer (4LB)] and exten-sibility [short-stretch (SSB), long-stretch (LSB)] (Table 1).However, the lack of international standardisation in ban-dage classification systems, along with regional variationsin practice, makes consensus on efficacy of types of com-pression difficult to achieve (Keller et al. 2009). Althoughtraditional compression bandage systems have historicallyused either elastic or inelastic technology to promotevenous return, more recent innovations have led to thedevelopmentofmixed-componentsystems(MCSs;thisabbreviation has been invented by the author) which com-bine the two.Aims
The aim of this systematic literature review was to explorethe currently available evidence for MCSs containing bothelastic and inelastic materials (MCSA and MCSB; Table 2)commonly used in the treatment of venous leg ulcers(VLUs). The rationale for the development of MCSs pointsto a 'best of both' approach including sustained interfacepressure, reduced healing time and reduced slippage attribu-ted to elastic systems, combined with lower resting pres-sures,easeofapplication(Collier&Schuren2007,Vowden & Vowden 2012, Protz et al. 2014), reduced bulk,increased comfort and improved quality of life (Jungeret al. 2009, Harding et al. 2015) associated with inelasticsystems. Using the best features of both technologies wouldarguably be an effective and innovative way to create asuperiorproduct.Butdoesitautomaticallyleadtoimproved efficacy? Might it not be counterargued that suchan exercise could serve to dilute benefits and lead to pooreroverall bandage performance? These principles are exploredin concepts such as principal component analysis whichquestions whether combining primary elements leads tocomplementarymechanisms of action or,alternatively,competing and interacting mechanisms that weaken individ-ual components (Jollife 2014).Despite an increased use in practice and inclusion onbandage formularies across the UK and further afield, anumber of current international consensus and guidancedocumentspertainingtocompressiontherapyfailtoaddressorexploreMCSsasusefulalternativesto
Elastic bandage systemsOther names: Long-stretch, active compression, 2LB, 4LBProperties: High elastomer content with over 140% extensibility;continuous recoil and follow through to the limb; maintainrelatively constant interface pressure; can provide high, mediumand low pressure (high or reduced compression) depending uponpreparation and number of layers; generally applied at 50%stretch; always applied over a subwadding layerAvailable in one-, two-, three- and four-layer kit preparationsInelastic bandage systemsOther names: Short-stretch, passive compressionProperties: High cotton and low elastomer content with littleextensibility; applied at 100% stretch to form rigid tube aroundlimb; large fluctuations in interface pressure depending on level ofactivity; massage calf pump to promote venous return duringactivity; always applied over a subwadding layer; suitable forthose requiring reduced compression due to lower restingpressuresAvailable in one- or two-layer kit preparationsMixed-component systemsOther names: 2LBProperties: Combine active and passive compression by either usingseparate layers containing purely elastic or inelastic materials; orcombining elastic and inelastic materials in a single layer appliedover a subwadding layer; combine sustained interface pressurewith lower resting pressuresAvailable in two-layer kit preparations providing either full orreduced compression
traditional elastic and inelastic systems (EWMA 2003,RCN 2006, SIGN 2010, AWMA 2011, O'Donnell et al.2014). This is largely due to their referral to three high-quality, large-scale independent studies in the determinationof their recommendations (Cullum et al. 2001, O'Mearaet al. 2009, 2013), all of which recognise the significantlyshorter healing time with compression bandages containingan elastic component. However, despite the arguable qual-ity of all three studies, a number of potential limitationsmust be considered in relation to their findings. First, thedate limitations set in the search strategy for even the mostrecent of the three (O'Meara et al. 2013) would excluderelevant literature exploring more recent innovations incompression therapy (i.e. MCSs). Second, the lack of astandardised compression bandage classification system, inconjunction with inconsistencies in descriptive terminology,may render the rigid criteria for Cochrane-scale reviewsand meta-analyses too inflexible to pick up such distinctionsand cut out potentially valuable literature altogether. Forthis reason, it might be proposed that in this particular sub-ject area, traditional hierarchies of evidence can be limiting.Finally, the suggestion that the variable of clinician skillwas not controlled in a number of the studies included ineach publication may have impacted on findings (O'Donnellet al. 2014), a shortfall that will be explored later in thisreview. Since the publication of O'Meara et al. (2013),Wounds International, a renowned body of wound careexpertise, has published one of the more recent consensusdocuments pertaining to leg ulcers (Harding et al. 2015).Although the document does not support any single type ofbandage system as being more effective for healing ulcers,it does support the use of those with a high Status StiffnessIndex (SSI), which is defined as the difference betweeninterface pressure measurements during standing and supinepositions and is increasingly being regarded as an indicatorof clinical efficacy, as it increases massage of the calf pump,thereby aiding venous return (Partsch et al. 2006). Aninelastic bandage would be described as having a high SSI(a pressure gradient > 10), whilst an elastic system wouldhave a lower SSI (<10). However, the application of ban-dage systems containing several layers increases thicknessand therefore stiffness, thereby leading to high SSI regard-less of material composition (Partsch et al. 2006).
MethodsOutcome subgroups and criteria for critical review includedthe following: healing rates and ulcer improvement, ease ofapplication, measurement of interface pressure, bandageslippage, and patient comfort and concordance as theyreflect the criteria presented by expert consensus as definingideal compression (WUWHS 2008, Harding et al. 2015).Healing rates and reduction in wound size, relative woundarea reduction (RWAR) or total wound area reduction, arethe most frequently applied primary endpoints in studies onthe efficacy of compression bandage systems as they oftenrepresent the most obvious goal of treatment, but increas-ingly, additional outcomes represent both a direct link tohealing and independent outcomes in themselves. Ease ofapplication is important because an incorrectly applied ban-dage is unlikely to achieve desired levels of compressionand, consequently, healing and may additionally contributeto adverse events such as pressure damage, slippage ortrauma (Moffatt 2007). Although maintenance of interfacepressure has been traditionally considered to be determi-nant of a bandage system's efficacy, the direct link betweenmaintenance of interface pressure and healing is unclear(Partsch et al. 2006); however, evidence that bandages con-taining an elastic component and a consequent ability tosustain pressure are associated with faster healing cannotbe ignored (O'Meara et al. 2013). A low level of slippageitself may be an indicator of sustained interface pressurebut can additionally lead to reduced trauma, better comfortand less frequent bandage changes. Finally, literature sup-porting the importance of patient comfort and concordanceas a desirable endpoint in itself, whilst also ensuring theachievement of additional outcomes in compression, isabound (Morison et al. 2007, Moffatt 2007, Harding et al.2015).
Search strategyAlthough RCTs and quantitative literature should providevaluable sources of collated numerical, statistical data nec-essary to assist in determining the outcomes of the researchquestion, qualitative studies, most notably those pertainingto evidence surrounding patient concordance, comfort andMixed-component system A (MCSA)Mixed-component system B (MCSB)Layer 1Inelastic soft padding providing 30 mmHg at ankleFoam wadding layer providing no compressionLayer 2Elastic conforming layer providing 10 mmHg at ankleElastic/inelastic layer providing 40 mmHg at ankleTotal compression40 mmHg40 mmHg
quality of life, may be the more appropriate paradigm fromwhich to explore themes, descriptive data and the relation-ships between the researcher and participants in determin-ing outcomes for compression (Topping 2006). As manystudies relating to compression therapy seek evidence onoutcomes relating to both quantitative and qualitative data,studies using mixed-methods design might also be of rele-vance (Pluye & Hong 2013). Much of the literature sup-porting wound care is in the shape of consensus documentsand case studies, both of which focus upon the strength ofexpert opinions and experiential knowledge in the gatheringof relevant evidence. A seminal work by Carper (1978)cited four fundamentals of nursing knowledge includingempirics, ethics, aesthetics and personal knowledge whichwere proposed to carry equal weight in clinical decision-making. Therefore, the hierarchy of evidence applied forthe purposes of this review will be as follows:1 RCTs.2 Cohort/Case controlled studies.3 Qualitative or mixed-methods studies.4 Case studies in series.Case studies were only considered for inclusion if theywere presented in a series format to maximise the strengthof quantitative data. The rationale for this was that single-case studies would likely be too numerous and lacking inappropriate wider applicability. No ethical approval wasrequired as the review did not involve a primary studyusing participants.An initial search was carried out in February 2015 ondatabases including Cochrane, CINAHL and Medline. Asmixed-component bandage systems are a relatively recentdevelopmentincompressiontherapy,limitsweresetbetween 2005-March 2015 to eliminate literature thatwould not be relevant.Inclusion Criteria: Primary quantitative, qualitative andmixed-methods studies and case studies series exploring theefficacy of mixed-component compression systems; English-language publications; published between 2005-2015; andankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI) range between 08-13.Exclusion Criteria: Secondary studies exploring the effi-cacy of mixed-component compression; studies exploringmixed-component compression in the treatment of nonve-nous or mixed-aetiology ulcers (i.e. ABPI <08 or above13); studies published out with date limits; non-English-language publications; and studies exploring MCSs in thetreatment of lymphoedema.The following keywords and terms were applied bothsingularly and in various combinations with truncations toallow all possible noun and verb endings: venous leg ulcer*,
varicose ulcer*, leg ulcer*, compression, bandag*, elastic,inelastic, short stretch, healing rate*, interface pressure,mixed component*, two-layer, four-layer and multi-layer.As regional variations can present in medical terminol-ogy, many terms used to refer to the same condition (i.e.venous ulcer, varicose ulcer, leg ulcer) were entered in aneffort to capture all available literature. However, as dis-cussed in the background section of this review, the lack ofstandardised classification system and considerable varia-tion in terms to describe types of bandage properties, mate-rials and functions presented considerable challenges whenattempting to search the literature in a systematic way. Anexample is the term mixed component, which failed toidentify any literature when inputted to the database searchmechanism, either singularly or in combination with otherkeywords. Had the author not been experienced in the useof compression therapy and familiar with the variousdescriptors applied to it in practice, it may have presentedchallenges for selecting appropriate key search terms. Inthis respect, an arguable shortfall of the Cochrane andPRISMA search strategies is their strict criteria for inclusionwhich could potentially fail to capture key pieces of litera-ture. Factors commonly applied to determine outcomes ofcompression therapy (i.e. healing rates, interface pressure)were also included in combination with additional searchterms to target studies exploring outcomes.Saved searches were rerun on a weekly basis until March2015, but no new studies were identified. The initial searchresult identified 475 studies, which, following exclusion attitle and abstract stage, was reduced to 7. After evaluation atfull text, no further studies were excluded. Subsequent elec-tronic and hand searches were also carried out at libraryresource centres; however, no further studies were identifiedfor inclusion. Additional searches were carried out on Goo-gle Scholar which identified one further study suitable forinclusion, and the final number of studies included in thereview component was 8 (Fig. 1). A summary of the papersselected for inclusion is detailed in Table 3.
ResultsTwo critical appraisal tools were used as frameworks dur-ing the review process: the first, adapted by Woolliamset al. (2009), for appraisal of general literature such as casestudies; and the second adapted from the Critical AppraisalSkills Programme for quantitative studies. As none of theeight studies selected for review applied true mixed-meth-ods design, the general literature tool was used in those thatdid not fit the quantitative methodology profile. A numberof outcome subgroups emerged from the papers as follows:L WelshMCSs and ulcer healing.MCSs and ease of bandage application.MCSs and interface pressure.MCSs and QoL outcomes.MCSs and clinician bandage application skill.Outcome subgroups emerging from the literatureMCSs and ulcer healingFour of the papers (Benigni et al. 2007, Hayes & Day 2008,Moffatt et al. 2008, Lazareth et al. 2012) used ulcer healingas an outcome for proposed efficacy. Lazareth et al. (2012),whodefinedhealingbycompletere-epithelisationat12 weeks, found slightly higher healing rates for MCSAusing ITT methodology (p = 00165) and PP (p = 0001),but only results for PP were significant. AWAR, RWAR andtime to reach complete epithelisation were similar for 4LBand MCSA using both ITT and PP. The application of bothITT and PP analysis may have increased validity; however,authors failed to clarify whether a structured wound assess-ment tool was used and by whom healing was determined.As wound assessment is considered to be a subjective processwhich varies from clinician to clinician, this may haveresulted in intersubject variability (Wounds UK 2013).Studies excluded on the basis of information in titles and abstracts (n = 468)Publications retrieved for more detailed evaluation (n = 7)
Publications excluded after full evaluation due to ineligible subject matter (n = 0)Publications retrieved from additional search strategies (hand, Google Scholar, etc.) (n = 1)Total number of publications to be included in systematic review component = (n = 8)S1 Total studies identified by initial database search using terms leg ulcer and compression (n = 475) S2 Total new studies identified by database search using terms leg ulcer and compression and interface pressure (n = 0)S3 Total studies identified by database search using terms leg ulcer and compression and two-layer (n = 10)S4 Total new studies identified by data database using terms leg ulcer and compression and mixed component (n = 0)S5 Total new studies identified by database search using terms leg ulcer and compression and inelastic(n = 0)
S6 Total studies identified by database search using terms leg ulcer and compression and bandag* (n = 242)Studies excluded on the basis of information in titles and abstracts and duplication (n = 242)S7 Total studies identified by database search using terms leg ulcer and compression and bandag* and two -layer (n = 9)S8 Total studies identified by database search using terms venous leg ulcer and compression and bandag*and two-layer (n = 2)ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compression1. Lazareth et al. (2012)RCT to compare ulcer healingrates and HRQoL between twobandage systemsMCSA compared with multilayerelastic system (4LB)Primary: complete healing at12 weeksSecondary: absolute wound areareduction (AWAR) at 12 weeks;relative wound area reduction(RWAR) at four weekscompared to baseline; pain andease of applicationNo significant difference inhealing rates at 12 weeksbetween two systems(p = 00165)AWAR and RWAR similar inboth systems; no significant painreduction between two groups;MCSA significantly easier toapply than 4LB (p = 0038)2. Moffatt et al. (2008)Randomised controlled crossoverstudy to compare slippage,HRQoL, healing and patientpreference of two bandagesystemsMCSB compared with multilayerelastic system (4LB)Primary: bandage slippageSecondary: HRQoL, woundhealing and patient preference
Significant difference in slippagebetween two systems in favourof MCSB (p < 0001); nosignificant difference in healingrates between two systems;Significant difference in somecriteria of HRQoL in favour ofMCSB (<005); 72% preferredMCSB3. Junger et al. (2009)Open, randomised trial onhealthy volunteers to compareinterface pressure in threebandage systemsMCSA compared with multilayerelastic system (4LB) and SSBPrimary: Measurement ofinterface pressure on days 0, 1,3 and 7Secondary: tolerability andcomfortLoss of maximal workingpressure significantly lower forMCSA (p = 0017) than SSB butsimilar to 4LBMCSA had significantly lowerscores for toleration of heat thatSSB (p < 0001); MCSAsignificantly lower scores than4LB for tightness, pain,sweating, itching and heat;MCSA had significantly lowerscores than SSB and 4LB forankle immobility and slippage;and then 4LB for concordancewhen sleeping, sitting andwalking; significantly better lossof lower limb volume than SSB4. Protz et al. (2014)Open trial on healthy volunteersto compare interface pressure insix bandage systemsMCSA and MCSB compared withmultilayer elastic system (4LB),inelastic bandage, 2LB(A) and2LB(B)Primary: resting and workingpressures at 1 hour, 1 day,3 days and 7 daysSecondary: Quality of lifeAll systems lose interfacepressures (mean loss over7 days: 307 mmHg); MCSAloses most but is at highest atbaseline; MCSB loses leastL WelshStudyDesign and aimCompression system usedOutcome measuresKey results
5. Hanna et al. (2008)Mixed-methods trial to compareinterface pressure and ease ofapplication between threebandage systemsMCSA compared with multilayerelastic system (4LB) and SSBPrimary: interface pressureachieved in three positionsfollowing applicationSecondary: time taken to apply,qualitative clinician feedback75% participants achieved desiredtherapeutic pressure range withMCSA, 69% with 4LB and 25%with SSB; SSB was shortestapplication time, MCSA nextthen 4LB; 88% preferred MCSAto others6. Benigni et al. (2007)Prospective noncomparative open-label multicentre phase IIIclinical study to explore ulcerhealing, oedema and QoL withMCSAMCSAPrimary: reduction in woundsurface area in six weeksSecondary: oedema, QoLMean reduction in wound sizewas 585% (<00001); 24%healed; reduction in oedema,reduced pain 95% reportedcomfort, better for wearingnormal shoes7. Hayes and Day (2008)Case studies (four studies) toexplore efficacy of MCSBMCSBSlippage, wear time, concordance,strikethrough, wounddimensionsPatients found MCSB moretolerable and comfortable thanprevious systems8. Collier and Schuren (2007)Mixed-methods multisiteinternational evaluation tocompare interface pressurebetween five bandage systemsMCSB compared with expertclinician's usual bandage [4LB,SSB(A) and SSB(B)], pastebandagePrimary: Pressure measurementsimmediately after application;time to apply bandage system(s);Secondary: Participant viewsabout system
Significant difference inreproducibility between MCSBand 4LB (0.00001) and MCSBand SSB (A) 0001 and SSB (B)0.001; no significant differencebetween MCSB and SSB(A), SSB(B) and Unna's boot (pastebandage) in ease of applicationbut significant difference with4LB (00001)MCSA, mixed-component system A; MCSB, mixed-component system B; 4LB, four-layer elastic bandage; SSB(A), short-stretch bandage A; SSB(B), short-stretch bandage B; 2LB(A),two-layer elastic bandage A; 2LB(B), two-layer elastic bandage B; HRQoL, health-related quality of life; QoL, quality of life; CWIS, Cardiff Wound Impact Schedule.ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compression
Moffatt et al.'s (2008) study, which used ulcer healing asa secondary endpoint, also found no significant differencein healing rates between 4LBs and MCSB both in per centof wounds that healed (p = 030) and in linear healing rate(p = 094). This was based on percentage of change in ulcerdimensions and LHR at four weeks, with the rationale thatit was indicative of complete healing of VLUs at 12 weeks.However, 12 participants did not complete the study due toeither dropout or healing, and as such, ITT analysis wasused instead of PP, which may limit validity. Benigni et al.(2007) assessed healing based on reduction in wound sur-faceareaatsix weeks,withareductionof585%(p < 00001). A 40% reduction in surface area in morethan 75% of ulcers at study onset was also found usingMCSA compared to previous systems at the six-week end-point which demonstrates outcome data similar to but nobetter than alternative bandage systems.Hayesand Day (2008),theonly casestudyseriesincluded in the review, found that of four participants intheir series of case studies using MCSB, one reached com-plete ulcer healing at five weeks, one showed a decrease inulcer dimensions, one found better oedema and exudatecontrol and one deteriorated due to external factors. LikeBenigni et al. (2007), a noncomparative approach wasapplied, meaning that efficacy of MCSs in improving heal-ing rates was difficult to affirm. Whilst none of the studiesusing ulcer healing as an outcome confirmed the validity ofseveral tools applied to assess wound quality (i.e. presenceof devitalised tissue, infection), Hayes and Day (2008) addi-tionally failed to apply either statistical or thematic analysisto interpret data. In contrast, Lazareth et al. (2012) usednonparticipating blinded clinicians and a recognised soft-ware tool to collate wound dimensions, and Moffatt et al.(2008), although unable to blind investigators, used anindependent and blinded clinician to trace ulcer dimensionsand randomly assigned participants to each bandage groupusing software, as well as an independent biostatistician,which reduces potential order effects and increases bothreliability and validity of data.All four studies used patients with leg ulcers as partici-pants, and it was important that criteria for inclusion andexclusion were appropriate and well defined as variablespertaining to mobility, health and overall condition or stageof CVI could affect results, particularly if participants werenot distributed equally between experimental and controlgroups (i.e. oedema, ulcer duration at onset of study, ulcersize, wound infection, ABPI and age). Lazareth et al.(2012) and Benigni et al. (2007) included participants withan ulcer duration ranging from 1-24 months which is con-siderable; for example, an ulcer that fails to heal after
six months in compression therapy is often categorised as'complex' with implications for prognosis and healing(Harding et al. 2015). Whilst the expectation is that >=70%of simple VLUs will reach healing within 18 weeks, thesame rate would not be expected of complex VLUs until24 weeks regardless of compression system selected (Mar-golis et al. 2000). Moffatt et al. (2008) included partici-pants with the presence of ulcers for two or more weeksprior to onset of trial but did not define an upper limit ofulcer duration, whilst Hayes and Day (2008) failed todefine any inclusion and exclusion criteria.An ulcer surface area of >5 cm has also been linked topoorer prognosis, and it might be argued that participantsfitting this criteria should have been excluded. Lazarethet al. (2012) applied the most rigorous criteria and includedonly those with ulcer areas 2-5 cm, whilst Benigni et al.(2009)includedparticipantswiththoserangingfrom2-20 cm. Two of the four case studies presented by Hayesand Day (2008) had ulcer dimensions exceeding an area of5 cm, whilst Moffatt et al. (2008) did not define an uppersurface area limit.The presence of multiple ulcers, an additional indicatorfor a complex clinical picture that has been linked withdelayed healing (Harding et al. 2015), was not a criterionfor exclusion by any of the four studies. When participantshad bilateral ulceration, Moffatt et al. (2008) permittedinvestigators to apply clinical judgement when decidingwhich leg to include. However, the absence of rigorous con-trol over this decision-making pathway could have led toinvestigator subjectivity and bias towards placing the leg thatwould be more likely to heal into the experimental group.Wound infection at onset of study was a criterion for exclu-sion for Lazareth et al. (2012), Moffatt et al. (2008) andBenigni et al. (2009), but no indication of diagnostic processwas provided (i.e. wound swab or clinical assessment). Thepresence of devitalised tissue on a wound bed can increaseodour, exudate and delay healing, all of which mimic signsof clinical infection and potentially resulting in misdiagnosisby clinicians (O'Brien 2002). Wound bed tissue as a factor inhealing was addressed only by Benigni et al. (2007), whoincluded participants with wounds with >=50% granulationtissue, and Lazareth et al. (2012), who included only partici-pants with ulcers at 'granulation stage of healing'. However,the latter goes on to contradict this statement by stating thatat study baseline, a median of 40 in the MCSA group and 30in the 4LB group had the presence of slough of the wound,which by its definition is devitalised tissue and quite distinctfrom granulation.All four studies confirmed the importance of determiningulcer aetiology as primarily venous prior to commencing
L Welshcompression, but variability in criteria for inclusion withmay also have confounded results. Lazareth et al. (2012)had the most clearly defined criterion with the exclusion ofparticipants with ABPI ranges out with 08-13; however,despite normal ABPIs a number of participants in the studyhad risk factors for arterial disease including diabetes andhypertension which may impact on prognosis and time toheal (Harding et al. 2015). Moffatt et al. (2008) and Hayesand Day (2008) specified only a lower limit of 08. Benigniet al. (2007) included only participants with 'venous aetiol-ogy' as determined by Doppler but did not provide ABPIrange limits, and it is therefore unclear what criteria wereapplied. Although acceptable ranges vary, ABPI readings of>=13 in the UK and Europe and >=14 in the USA are com-monly considered to be 'false high' due to vessel calcifica-tion. The clinical significance is that true ABPI readings arelikely to be considerably lower and cannot be consistentlyrelied upon to exclude arterial disease; the absence of anupper ABPI limit can therefore fail to exclude participantswith arterial disease, thereby potentially influencing healingrates and study results.Finally, all studies included participants with an age >18(>21 in for participants in US centre; Moffatt et al. 2008),which was appropriate in terms of research study protocolwith regard to ethics and consent; however, none gave anupper age limit for inclusion, increasing likelihood of rangeand therefore potential confounding variables relating tohealth and mobility that may have affected healing ratesand results.
MCSs and ease of applicationCollier and Schuren (2007), Hayes and Day (2008), Hannaet al. (2008), and Lazareth et al. (2012) used ease of appli-cation from the perspective of clinician investigators as astudy endpoint, with all results favouring MCSs (i.e. eitherMCSA or MCSB) over previous systems. Lazareth et al.(2012) demonstrated significant results in this outcome(p = 0038), with 62% of participating investigators findingMCSA easy to apply compared to 47% for 4LBs. Hannaet al. (2008) found 88% of participants preferred MCSA toalternative systems (4LB and SSBs), whilst Collier andSchuren (2007) found a significant difference favouringMCSB over 4LBs (p = 00001) but no significant differencewith SSB(A), SSB(B) or the paste bandage. Hanna et al.(2008) also collated data on application time of each sys-tem as an endpoint associated with efficacy, with SSBs hav-ing the shortest mean, SD and median, followed by MCSAand lastly by 4LBs; however, time to apply is not necessar-ily an indicator of efficacy or quality. Hayes and Day(2008) found MCSB to be associated with both easierapplication and removal but did not provide any indicationof how such data were collated or analysed and did notcompare this outcome to any other bandage systems. OnlyLazareth et al. (2012) used a four-point scale to measureease of application, whilst in the remaining studies ques-tionnaires that were used to gather ease of application datawere not shown. Leading questions or the visibility of spon-soring industry logos could therefore not be eliminated asfactors which may have led participants to favour theexperimental bandage.
MCSs and interface pressureAn overview of the two studies measuring interface pres-sure on healthy volunteers (Junger et al. 2009, Protz et al.2014) is given in Table 4. Overall, Junger et al. (2009)found MCSA to have similar abilities to the 4LB but per-form better than SSBs with significant findings in very fewparameters. The data also suggest that SSBs lose a largeamount of pressure almost immediately following applica-tion, but loss slows so that by day 7, all systems have simi-lar pressure profiles. Protz et al. (2014) found that allsystems lost significant interface pressure (mean loss overseven days = 307 mmHg)andlostpressurequickly,although some systems more markedly than others. SSBswere found to lose the most pressure and MCSA, whilstalso losing a lot of pressure, had the highest on initialapplication. 4LB and MCSB lost the least pressure, and thestudy found that no investigators achieved expected levelsof therapeutic pressure (40 mmHg), even when highly expe-rienced in bandage application. A further finding of interestwas that markers to guide bandage stretch and overlap (ason MCSA) were not found to ensure accuracy or correctapplication, and therefore, their reliability as a tool cannotbe assured.Hanna et al. (2008), who used experienced clinicians (i.e.Tissue Viability Nurse (TVNs) District Nurse (DNs) as par-ticipants (each applying three bandage systems (MCSA,4LB and SSB) to a healthy female volunteer), found that85% of investigators achieved the desired interface pressurelevel (between 30-50 mmHg) in MCSA, 69% in 4LB and25% in SSBs. This accounted for 75% achieving a sublevelof compression with SSBs, suggesting that they were themostcommonlymisappliedsystem.Inaddition,25%achieved pressures >50 mmHg in the 4LBs, suggesting thatthe risk of overcompression and pressure damage may beincreased with their use. Collier and Schuren (2007), theonly study measuring interface pressure using 24 expertclinicians to compare application of MCSB with their usualbandage of choice on an artificial limb, found that optimumpressures were more regularly obtained with MCSB than
ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compressionwith the remaining four systems; however, only resultscomparing MCSB with an alternative 2LB were significantin terms of reproducibility (p = 00001). Although adequatepressures were more regularly achieved with MCSB, gradu-ated compression was not found to be achieved using anyof the systems, although pressures achieved using MCSBRandomised designYNCompression bandage systems investigatedMCSAYYMCSBNY4LBYYSSBYY2LB(A)NN2LB(B)NNSchedule of pressure measurement recordingDay 0 (immediatelyfollowing application)YYDay 1YYDay 3YYDay 7YYPosition of pressure measurement recordingSupineYYSittingYYStandingYYDuring activityYYSignificant differences in pressure measurementsMCSA compared to 4LBSupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal workingpressure (during activity)NNMCSA compared to SSBSupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working(during activity)Y (p = 0017)NMCSA compared to 2LB(A)SupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working (during activity)NNMCSA compared to 2LB(B)SupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working(during activity)NNMCSB compared to 4LBSupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal workingpressure (during activity)NNMCSB compared to SSBSupineNNData overviewJungeret al.(2009)Protzet al.(2014)SittingNNStandingNNMaximal working (during activity)NNMCSB compared to 2LB(A)SupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working (during activity)NNMCSB compared to 2LB(B)SupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working (during activity)NNMCSB compared MCSASupineNNSittingNNStandingNNMaximal working (during activity)NNSignificant overall loss of maximal working pressure?MCSAY (<thanSSB atDay 3 only)MCSBN4LBY (<than SSB atDay 3 only)NSSBNN2LB(A)NN2LB(B)NNSignificant loss of overall pressure throughout experimental periodMCSAnaYMCSBnaY4LBnaYSSBnaY2LB(A)naY2LB(B)naYExceeds 40 mmHg at any time throughout experimental period?MCSAYnaMCSBnana4LBYnaSSBNna2LB(A)nana2LB(B)nanaY, yes; N, no; na, not applicable.L Welsh
were higher than participant expectation and lower for allremaining systems. An immediate limitation of the study isthat measurements were taken only following immediateapplication and sustainability of pressure was not consid-ered. Moffatt et al. (2008), which used slippage as a pri-mary endpoint, found a mean slippage of 248 cm forMCSB and 417 cm for the 4LB using a mixed analysis ofvariance model (p < 0001), demonstrating significantly lessslippage with MCSB.The four studies with interface pressure measurement asan endpoint (Collier & Schuren 2007, Hanna et al. 2008,Junger et al. 2009, Protz et al. 2014) used various recog-nised brands of pressure monitoring device. The difficultiesin obtaining accurate sub-bandage pressures are well docu-mented and subject to several intrinsic factors including legshape, weight, position and temperature and sensor place-ment (Finnie 2000), and doubts surrounding the limitationsof the application of laws of physics to estimate pressuresremain (Khaburi et al. 2011). There is also evidence to sug-gest that the accuracy of pressure sensors is limited byissues with performance under bandages (Thomas 2014).Finally, unless information surrounding exact method ofuse and calibration is provided, the reliability of the pres-sure monitor as a data collection tool cannot be safelyassumed (Finnie 2000, Thomas 2014).Pressure sensor position is an additional factor that maypresent as a confounding variable. Although pressure sen-sors attached to the B1 region (above the medial malleo-lus) where pressure is expected to be highest and thereforeargued to be of the most clinical significance, a more accu-rate clinical picture is thought to be obtained by placingsensors in at least two additional positions: BC (on themedial side of leg at calf's greatest circumference) and BF(on thigh at medial side midway between kneecap andgroin) to ensure accuracy (Partsch et al. 2006). Only Col-lier and Schuren (2007) complied with these recommenda-tions, with the remaining three studies placing sensorsonly at B1.
MCSs and QoL outcomesAll but two of the studies (Collier & Schuren 2007, Hannaet al. 2008) had findings to support better comfort, tolera-bility and QoL with either MCSA or MCSB compared toalternative systems using various outcome measures. Lazar-eth et al. (2012) measured tolerability according to inci-dence of adverse events and found 12% with MCSA and17% with 4LBs, respectively, with pain and new ulcerationbeing the most frequently reported events. Pain reductionwas more frequent with MCSA than 4LB and intermittentpain more marked and frequent with 4LB, although data
were subjective. For QoL, Moffatt et al. (2008) found a sig-nificant favouring of MCSB (p < 005) using the CardiffWound Impact Schedule (Price & Harding 2004) to score;however, this result was limited to physical symptoms onlyusing PP analysis and did not include additional outcomedomains such as mood and social factors related to QoL.As a means to reduce differences in response which mayresult from order of presentation, patient preference datawere obtained only from participants who reached cross-over period and had at least one postcrossover visit. 72%preferred MCSB, 15% preferred 4LBs and 6% expressedno preference regardless of randomisation order (p > 099).Step analysis using a pedometer to gauge mobility providedthe least reliable data within the study in terms of tool andtest format and was found to have no significant differencebetween systems.Junger et al. (2009) found MCSA to be significantlybetterthanthe4LBfortightness(p < 00003),pain(p < 00001), sweating (p = 00005), itching (p < 001) andsensation of heat (p < 00001). No difference was foundbetween MCSA and 4LB for burning and itching, andMCSA was similar to SSB for tolerability but better forheat. MCSA was significantly better than SSB for immobil-ity of ankle (p < 00001), slippage (p < 0003), loosening(p = 00003), concordance when sleeping (p = 00001), sit-ting (p < 00001) and walking (p < 00001). MCSA showedsimilar results with SSB for dermal desiccation and 4LB forlimb volume loss, but was significantly better than SSB forthe latter (p < 00485).Although healthy volunteers were used as participants,Protz et al. (2014) used a modified version of Freiburg LifeQuality Assessment of vein diseases (Augustin et al. 1997),the second of the two studies to use a validity-tested, dis-ease-specific tool to do so, which strengthens the rigour(Moffatt et al. (2008) was the other). Although the test wasshortened to suit healthy volunteers, the revised versionwas not shared and transferability was difficult to ascertain.Additionally, the findings from these particular data werenot provided and the only indicators of comfort and tolera-bility were those relating to dropout rate, which was con-siderable across the study (only 28 of 70 initial participantscompleted the study) but relatively low for both MCSA(two dropouts, one for pain and one for slippage) andMCSB (six dropouts, three for itching, two for slippage andone for pain).Benigni et al. (2007) found a reduction in oedema (12%had oedema compared to 70% at baseline), reduction inintensity of pain (intense for 45% at baseline compared to25% throughout study), reduction in heat (65% felt noheat during study compared to 56% at baseline) and a
ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compressionreduction in itchiness (59% felt no itch compared to 44%at baseline) with MCSA compared to previously used ban-dage systems. The majority of participants also reported animprovement in ability to put on footwear (84% had nodifficulty compared to 76% at baseline) and increased com-fort during the day (95% vs. 78% at baseline) and at night(92% vs. 80% at baseline). 11% of participants thoughtMCSA was less comfortable at night. Only three partici-pants dropped out, all for reasons unrelated to MCSA,which was deemed to be an indication of high patient con-cordance. Hayes and Day (2008) reported that all partici-pants found MCSB more comfortable and tolerable thanpreviously worn systems and improved ability to carry outdaily activities of living including wearing usual footwearand aesthetic acceptance; however, as with all outcomes intheir case study series, no systematic data collation or anal-ysis was applied.
MCSs and clinician skill in bandage applicationAll eight studies failed in some capacity to control clinicianskill in bandage application as a potential variable that mayhave affected outcomes and therefore findings. Lazarethet al. (2012), whose investigators comprised dermatologists,vascular physicians and tissue viability nurses, failed toidentify who applied each bandage, whether this was con-sistent and what skills, experience or training they had ineach. Investigators were provided with instructions on howto apply both MCSA and 4LB, but it remains unclear howstructured and standardised this was for each system. Mof-fatt et al. (2008) also used a variety of clinical expertsselected for their bandaging capabilities, but this could havevaried significantly as the exact nature of their area ofexpertise and experience was not declared. Additionally,formal training was provided only for MCSB, with therationale that clinicians were comparing them with theirusual bandage of choice with which they would be familiarand competent.Although Junger et al. (2009) used the same physicianto apply bandages to all participants, details of training orprevious experience were not provided, except that themanufacturer's instructions were followed for all systems.Protz et al. (2014) used three nurses as investigators butprovidednoinformationabouttrainingorpreviousknowledge and experience with each system. Hanna et al.(2008) recruited 32 DNs or TVNs with current regularexperience with a mean qualification time of nine years;however, time qualified is not necessarily a direct determi-nant of ability, and a significant skill variation could haveremained as a confounding factor. As with Moffatt et al.(2008), training was provided only for the experimental
system,withanassumptionthatclinicianswouldbealready familiar with the more established bandage sys-tems. Benigni et al. (2007) recruited either a vascular ordermatology physician at each of the 12 investigatingsites, but no mention of training or previous bandagingexperiencewasprovided.CollierandSchuren(2007)recruited 24 experts from six international sites but didnot determine the nature or extent of expertise. Althoughexperts were provided with a demonstration of applicationof the experimental bandage (MCSB) followed by anopportunity to practise, it does not state who demon-strated, length of practice time given and what their previ-ous experience was with either their preferred system orMCSB. Hayes and Day (2008) applied weekly bandages(MCSB) on 20 participants for a period of six weeks. Asboth investigators were leg ulcer specialist nurses with pre-sumed current and extensive experience, the baseline skillset is arguably more predictable in this study than in anumber of the others included in this review; however,training and skill is still not as well controlled as it shouldbe to eliminate it as a variable.DiscussionL Welsh
Quality of life outcomes measured by endpoints includingpain, comfort, heat, itch, mobility, tightness and ability towear normal clothing and footwear were included in all butone paper in the review with several significant results.MCSs were significantly associated with improved tolera-tion of heat, tightness, pain, itching, comfort and mobilityin two studies, whilst the remaining five, although still asso-ciating MCSs with improved QoL, presented less robustdata.Although the review revealed a sufficient amount of evi-dence relating to the efficacy of MCSs, three points shouldbe noted regarding potential limitations relating to the stud-ies included. First, all eight studies failed to address and ade-quately control clinical skill in bandage application as aconfounding variable that could affect the perceived efficacyof a bandage system and therefore final results. Training andskill in bandage application, although not identified as apotential variable in relevant literature pertaining to com-pression therapy (O'Meara et al. 2009, 2013), has beenrecognised by the Royal College of Nursing (2006) and sev-eral additional bodies as an important determinant of effi-cacyofcompression(WoundsInternational2013).However, due to the ongoing failure of key studies exploringcompression bandage systems to recognise and address clini-cian training and skill as a potential factor that can affectoutcomes, the efficacy of specific bandage systems remainsdifficult to confirm. A recent RCT in Canada by Harrisonet al. (2011), which has been regarded as seminal in recog-nising this limitation, has identified clinician skill as a signifi-cantvariableinachievingadequatecompressionandcontinues to raise awareness of its relevance for many of therecent studies that shape international guidance on compres-sion. Crucially, the study found that when clinicians wereappropriately trained and skilled in bandage application in apractice setting, type of compression system was not a signif-icant variable determining leg ulcer healing rates. Two addi-tional factors might also be proposed to affect ability andcompetence in bandage application: first, the country inwhich the study was carried and the associated trends andpreferences for a certain bandage type. For example, clini-cians in France, where MCSA is produced and widely usedand where Lazareth et al. (2012) recruited 69% of its partic-ipants, may be more skilled in its application than those inareas where 4LBs are historically favoured (i.e. the UK). Sec-ond, where industry sponsorship was associated with theexperimental bandage system, it cannot be ruled out thattraining provided was comparatively more comprehensive orpersuasive towards it, thus improving outcomes in thisgroup. Additionally, previous formal training and capabilitycannot be assumed, and it might be argued that more recent
training would result in a higher level of competence for theexperimental group bandage (MCSB).Second, all but one paper were sponsored by industryproducing either MCSA or MCSB which may have led topotential bias towards promotion of their efficacy. Andthird, none of the studies explored the combination of elas-tic and elastic components as an innovative 'best of both'technology and bandage category which may distinguish itfrom alternative systems using purely elastic or inelasticcomponents in terms of therapeutic efficacy.Strengths and limitations of the reviewAs there is so little existing literature exploring the collec-tive evidence for MCSs as a compression bandage systemwithin its own distinct category, this review has synthesisedcurrent evidence to reveal an increased understanding oftheir efficacy for consideration of further research. Had theauthor been able to access a research team to support largerstudy, a more comprehensive picture of the efficacy ofMCSs might have been obtained. Following completion ofthe review, new evidence comparing MCSA to MCSB alsoemerged; a retrospective analysis of patients' records in theUK found both systems to be associated with positive out-comes including cost-effectiveness, ulcer healing and QoL(Guest et al. 2015). The design of the study would havepotentially contributed towards answering the researchquestion as it would have strengthened the variation inmethodologies included in the review, whilst additionaldata on cost-effectiveness of MCSs would have been usefulas it was not an outcome in any of the studies included inthis review.Conclusion
In conclusion, this systematic review has found MCSs to bean evidence-based alternative to 4LBs, 2LBs and SSBs,which have specific advantages over 4LBs relating to com-fort, tolerability and QoL. Although the majority of thefindings were collated using quantitative data, a small num-ber of the studies also included qualitative data and indica-tors such as patient or clinician preference to determineefficacy. However, as thematic analysis of qualitative datain the selected studies was unsystematic and relativelyweak, the strength of the evidence is difficult to confirm.Clinician skill in bandage application was a poorly con-trolled variable in all of the studies, as well as those whichdetermine international compression consensus, which mayfurther limit some of the findings. Recommendations forfurther research and practice include the following:ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compression*More comprehensive and appropriate classification sys-tems for compression bandage systems.*Further research exploring the technology of combiningelastic and inelastic components in MCSs as a distinctindicator of efficacy in itself.*Further study on the roles and relationships of interfacepressure and SSI in determining effective compressiontherapy outcomes.*Increased recognition of clinician skill in bandage appli-cation as an inadequately controlled variable affectingoutcomes on many key studies relating to compressiontherapy; and further studies which implement rigorouscontrol through evidence-based training.Relevance to clinical practice
Due to changing demographics, VLUs are a significant bur-den which is expected to increase both in prevalence and incomplexity. Clinicians are therefore required to have thenecessary knowledge and skills in the most appropriatetherapeutic interventions to ensure timely, evidence-basedtreatment plans which maximise outcomes. Although MCSsare increasingly being used in practice, they continue to beoverlookedinanumberofinternationalconsensusdocuments and guidelines relating to compression; thisreview therefore synthesises existing evidence on their effi-cacy and encourages clinicians to regard them as an effec-tive, person-centred alternative to purely elastic or inelasticcompression systems. Additionally, this review highlightsthe importance of clinician skill in bandage application as acrucial determinant of effective compression.AcknowledgementsThis systematic review was submitted as part of an MScdissertation. The author wishes to acknowledge the supportof academic supervisors Ailsa Sharp and Catherine Maho-ney of Edinburgh Napier University and NHS Greater Glas-gow and Clyde for partial funding of the programme.ContributionsLW is sole author and contributed to all categories.Conflict of interestsThe author has no conflict of interests to declare.
ReferencesAugustin M, Dieterle W, Zschocke I, BrillC, Trefzer D, Peschen M, SchEURopf E &VanscheidtW(1997)Developmentandvalidation ofadisease-specificquestionnaire on the quality of life ofpatients with chronic venous insuffi-ciency. Vasa 26, 291-301.Australian Wound Management Associa-tion (2011) Australian and New Zeal-and Clinical Practice Guideline forPreventionandManagementofVenous Ulcers. Cambridge Publishing,Port Melbourne.Benigni JP, Lazareth I, Paprex P, GerardJL, Alves M, Vin F, Meaume S, SenetP & Allaert FA (2007) Efficacy, safetyand acceptability of a new two-layerbandage system for venous leg ulcers.Journal of Wound Care 16, 385-390.Blair S, Wright DD, Backhouse CM, Rid-dle E & McCollum CN (1988) Sus-tainedcompressionandhealingofchroniclegulcers.BritishMedicalJournal 297, 1159.Carper B (1978) Fundamentals of knowinginnursing.AdvancesinNursingScience 1, 13-23.
Collier M & Schuren J (2007) Ease of useand reproducibility of five compres-sion systems. Journal of Wound Care3M(Supplement), 8-10.Cullum N, Nelson EA, Fletcher AW &Sheldon TA (2001) Systematic reviewsof wound care management: (5) beds;(6)compression:(7)lasertherapy,therapeutic ultrasound, electrotherapyand electromagnetic therapy. HealthTechnology Assessment 5, 1-221.European Wound Management Association(2003)UnderstandingCompressionTherapy:APositionDocument.EWMA, Medical Education Partner-ship: London.Finnie A (2000) Interface pressure mea-surements in leg ulcer management.British Journal of Nursing 9, S8-S18.Guest JF, Gerrish A, Vowden P & Vowden K(2015)Clinicaloutcomesandcost-effectiveness of three alternative com-pression systems used in the managementof venous leg ulcers. Journal of WoundCare 24, 300-310.Hanna R, Bohbot S & Connolly N (2008)A comparison of interface pressureofthreecompressionbandagesys-tems. British Journal of Nursing 17,S1-S5.Harding K, Dowsett C, Fias L, Jelnes R,Mosti G, EUROien R, Partsch H, ReederS, Senet P, Verdu Soriano J & Van-scheidt W (2015) Simplifying venousleg ulcer management. Consensus Rec-ommendations. Wounds International2015. Available at: www.woundsinter-national.com(accessed19April2015).Harrison MB, VanDenKerkhof EG, Hop-man WM, Graham ID, Carley ME &NelsonEA(2011)TheCanadianBandaging Trial:evidenceinformedleg ulcer care and the effectiveness oftwodifferenttechnologies.BioMedCentral Nursing 10, 20.Hayes W & Day J (2008) Case studiesevaluating 3M's two layer compres-sion system: Coban 2. British Journalof Community Nursing. Wound CareSupplement 13, S14-S23.JollifeI(2014)Principalcomponentanalysis. In Wiley StatsRef: StatisticsReference Online. Wiley, New York.
L WelshJunger M, Ladwig A, Bohbot S & HaaseH(2009)Comparisonofinterfacepressures of three compression ban-daging systems used on healthy volun-teers. Journal of Wound Care 18,474-480.Keller A, Muller M, Calow T, Kern IK &Schumann H (2009) Bandage pressuremeasurementandtraining:simpleinterventions to improve efficacy incompression bandaging. InternationalWound Journal 6, 324-330.Khaburi JAI, Dehghani-Sanji AA, NelsonA & Hutchinson J (2011) Effect ofbandage thickness on interface pres-sure applied by compression bandages.Medical Engineering and Physics 34,378-385.Lazareth I, Moffatt C, Dissemond J, LessnePadieu AS, Truchetet F, Beissert S,Wicks G, Tilbe H, Sauvadet A, Boh-bot S & Meaume S (2012) Efficacy oftwo compression systems in the man-agement of venous leg ulcers: resultsofaEuropeanRCT.JournalofWound Care 21, 553-561.Margolis DJ, Berlin JA & Storm BL (2000)Which venous ulcers will heal withlimb compression bandages? AmericanJournal of Medicine 109, 15-19.Moffatt C (2007) Compression Therapy inPractice. Cromwell Press, Trowbridge.Moffatt CJ, Franks PJ, Doherty DC, Mar-tin R, Blewett R & Ross F (2004)Prevalence of leg ulceration in a Lon-don population. Quarterly Journal ofMedicine 97, 431-437.Moffatt C, Edwards L, Collier M, Tread-well T, Miller M, Shafer L, Sibbald G,Brassard A, McIntosh A, ReyzelmanA, Price P, Merkel Kraus S, Walters S& Harding K (2008) A randomisedcontrolled 8-week crossover clinicalevaluation of the 3M Coban 2-layercompression system vs Profore toevaluate the product performance inpatients with venous leg ulcers. Inter-national Wound Journal 5, 267-279.Morison MJ, Moffat C & Franks P (2007)Leg Ulcers. A Problem-based LearningApproach, Mosby Elsevier, Oxford.
O'Brien M (2002) Exploring methods ofwound debridement. British Journal ofCommunity Nursing 10, 10-18.O'Donnell T, Passman MA, Marston WA,Ennis WJ, Dalsing M, Kistner RL, LurieF, Henke PK, Gloviczki ML, Eklof BG,Stoughton J, Raju S, Shortell CK, Raf-fetto JD, Partsch H, Pounds LC, Cum-mings ME, Gillespie DL, McLaffertyRB, Hassan Murad M, Wakefield TW& Gloviczki P (2014) Management ofvenous leg ulcers: clinical practice guide-lines of the Society for Vascular Surgeryand the American Venous Forum. Jour-nal of Vascular Surgery 60, 3S-59S.O'Meara S, Tierney J, Cullum N, BlandJM, Franks PJ, Mole T & Scriven M(2009) Four layer bandage comparedwith short stretch bandage for venouslegulcers:systematicreviewandmeta-analysisofrandomisedcon-trolled trials with data from individualpatients. British Medical Journal 338,b1344.O'Meara S, Cullum NA & Nelson EA(2013) Compression for venous ulcers.CochraneDatabaseofSystematicReviews, Issue 3, Art. No.: CD000265.Partsch H, Clark M, Bassez S, Benigni JP,Becker F, Blazek M, Caprini J, Cornu-Thenard A, Hafner J, Flour M, JungerM, Moffatt C & Neumann M (2006)Measurement of lower leg compres-sion in vivo: recommendations for theperformance of measurements of inter-face pressure and stiffness. Dermato-logic Surgery 32, 224-233.Pluye P & Hong QN (2013) Combiningthe power of stories and the power ofnumbers: mixed methods research andmixed studies reviews. Annual Reviewof Public Health 35, 29-48.PriceP&HardingK(2004)Cardiffwound impact schedule: the develop-ment ofcondition-specific question-naire to assess health-related qualityof life in patients with chronic woundsofthelowerlimb.InternationalWound Journal 1, 10-17.Protz K, Heyer K, Verheyen-Cronau I &Augustin M (2014) Loss of interface
pressure in various compression ban-dage systems over seven days. Derma-tology 229, 343-359.Royal College of Nursing (2006) ClinicalPractice Guideline: The Nursing Man-agement of Patients with Venous LegUlcers. RCN, London.Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network(2010)ManagementofChronicVenous Leg Ulcers: A National Clini-cal Guideline. 120. SIGN, Edinburgh.Thomas S (2014) Practical limitations oftwo devices for the measurement ofsub-bandage pressure: implications forpractice. Journal of Wound Care 23,300-313.Topping A (2006) The quantitative-quali-tative continuum. InTheResearchProcess in Nursing, 5th edn (Gerish K& Lacey A eds). Blackwell Publishing,Oxford, pp. 157-172.Venous Forum of the Royal Society ofMedicine, Berridege D & BradburyA,et al.(2011)Recommendationsforthereferralandtreatmentofpatientswithlowerlimbchronicvenous insufficiency. Phlebology 26,91-93.Vowden P & Vowden K (2012) Effectivecompression therapy how to guide.Wound Essentials 7, 1-6.Woolliams M, Williams K, Butcher D &Pye J (2009) Be More Critical! APractical Guide for Health and SocialCareStudents.OxfordBrookesUniversity, Oxford.World Union of Wound Healing Sciences(2008)PrinciplesofBestPractice:Compression in Venous Leg Ulcers: AConsensus Document. MEP Ltd, Lon-don.Wounds International (2013) Principles ofcompression in venous disease: a prac-titioner's guide to treatment and pre-vention of venous ulcers. Available at:www.woundsinternational.com(ac-cessed 05 March 2015).Wounds UK (2013) Best Practice State-ment: The Use of Topical Antimicro-bial Agents in Wound Management,3rd edn. Wounds UK, London.ReviewSystematic review on Mixed Component Compression
