DISCURSIVE PAPERAn integrative review of skin assessment tools used to evaluate skininjury related to external beam radiation therapyCarol R Baines, William McGuiness and Geraldine A O'Rourke
Aims and objectives. To review literature associated with external beam radio-therapy and skin damage. A focus of the literature search is to highlight and dis-cuss the myriad of skin assessment tools that are available to the clinician whenassessing skin injury in patients receiving external beam radiation therapy.Background. It is apparent that despite considerable work being progressed in thedevelopment of individualised skin assessment tools, uptake and use is poor.These tools are designed to assist the clinician in the evaluation of damaged skinand predict the radiation wound development pathway.Design. An integrated review can be used to address a mature or new and emerg-ing topic through a systematic methodology, which is either theoretical or empiri-cal, gained from research, practice or policy initiatives (Whittemore & Knafl,Journal of Advanced Nursing, 52, 2005, 546). This review is particularly con-cerned with the employment of skin assessment tools by clinicians in patientswith radiation damaged skin. Using the search terms synonyms for radiation, skinand epidermal damage, PubMed/MEDLINE, Medical Complete and Web ofScience databases were searched. Consulting professional peers was employed aspart of the inclusion and exclusion process.Conclusion. There is a high level of unpredictability about which patient willhave an uncomplicated course of external beam radiotherapy. Variables mayinclude, but are not limited to, an acute reaction, a delayed reaction resulting inactual skin damage or no visible skin disturbance. The skin assessment tools thatare readily available are not regularly referenced in clinical practice whenattempting to manage the many side effects of radiation therapy. Skin assessmenttools require ongoing clinical validation, so they can be used to guide practition-ers to undertake further assessment of skin integrity.Relevance to clinical practice. The current body of knowledge suggests clinicianscaring for patients receiving therapeutic radiotherapy should consider integratinga recognised patient assessment skin framework into their daily routine. Such val-idated tools may add value to postradiotherapy patient care by providing a con-sistency of management and accordingly refining best practice.
What does this paper contributeto the wider global clinicalcommunity?* Provides tentative evidence thatalthough skin assessment toolsare widely available to clinicians,there actual use is intermittentand inconsistent.* The literature reviewed does notdemonstrateanassociationbetween using the current Radia-tion Therapy Oncology Groupand European Organisation forResearch and Treatment of Can-cer assessment and the manage-ment of a skin injury.* There is the appetite for a gen-eral overhaul of the clinical cur-rency for these assessment tools.Authors: Carol R Baines, RN, Masters Clinical Nursing, ClinicalNurse, Department of Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine, RoyalHobart Hospital, Hobart, Tas., Postgraduate Student, La TrobeUniversity, Melbourne, Vic.; William McGuiness, PhD, Head ofSchool Nursing and Midwifery, La Trobe University, Melbourne,Vic.; Geraldine A O'Rourke, RN Bachelor, Masters Clinical Nurs-ing, Project Manager, Nursing and Midwifery, Hobart, Tas., Officeof the Chief Nurse and Midwifery Officer, Department of Health& Human Services, Hobart, Tas., Postgraduate Student, UniversityTasmania, Hobart, Tas., AustraliaCorrespondence: Carol R Baines, Clinical Nurse, Department ofDivingandHyperbaricMedicine,RoyalHobartHospital,Liverpool Street, Hobart, Tas. 7000, Australia. Telephone: +61 036166 8322/+61 0408 992 403.E-mail: (c) 2016 John Wiley & Sons LtdJournal of Clinical Nursing, 26, 1137-1144, doi: 10.1111/jocn.134301137Key words: epidermal breakdown, radiotherapy, skinAccepted for publication: 11 June 2016Introduction
Epidermal damage is a potentially debilitating side effect ofradiotherapy. Patients who receive a form of superficialexternal beam radiotherapy might expect to experiencesome damage to their skin to varying degrees. Successfulmanagement relies on accurate identification of the amountof epidermal damage incurred. This review considers skindamage associated with therapeutic external beam radio-therapy when used in the treatment of cancers. It alsoexamines the suitability of individualised evaluation tools,which are widely available, in assisting with assessment ofdamaged skin, in the clinical environment.The World Health Organization - International Agencyfor Research on Cancer (WHO-IARC) data reflect a steadyupward trend in diagnosis of all cancers, there were 141million new cancer cases, 82 million cancer deaths and326 million people living with cancer (within five years ofdiagnosis)in2012worldwide.( therapy, alongside chemotherapy and surgery,is acknowledged as one of the three main treatment modali-tiescurrentlyusedtreatmalignancy.Bentzen(2006)acknowledges that radiotherapy has 'consistently remainedone of the two most effective treatments for cancer'. Pre-dicted increases in malignancy associated with an ageingpopulation will likely see an increased use of radiationtherapy.McQuestion (2011) and Tahir et al. (2015) in exploringskin care management postradiation therapy have identifiedthat epidermal damage, most often perceived as dermatitiswith varying levels of pain and discomfort, is a commongrievance for the patient. This side effect of treatment cre-ates an unwanted imposition on patients already copingwith a serious diagnosis and a questionable prognosis.Effective management to alleviate problematic symptomsrelies heavily on the ability of clinicians to accurately assessthe risk of radiation wound development and predict thepathway plus extent of any skin damage. This articlereviews skin damages from radiotherapy, in the context ofits effect on skin, contemporary assessment techniques andevaluation tools available to clinicians making critical deci-sions concerning patients who have demonstrated a dose-dependent skin reaction.
Background
Radiotherapy has been described by Sridhar and Symonds(2008) to be the art of using ionising radiation to destroymalignant tumours, whilst minimising damage to normaltissues, at the same time as treating differing types of malig-nancy. Radiation has been defined as an invisible highenergy ray that travels as waves or particles through spaceand some materials. There are two discreet types of radia-tion:1 Ionising - it has enough energy to change the chemicalcomposition of matter and2 Nonionising - it has less energy, but can still excite mole-cules and atoms.Exposure of tissue to ionising radiation induces deoxyri-bonucleic acid (DNA) damage, which when not efficientlyrepaired involves cellular death resulting in tissue dysfunc-tion, tissue disorganisation and bystander effects, cellulardamage in adjacent organs not directly treated by the radia-tion (Koukourakis 2012).Feldmeier (2004) states that energy from radiation isabsorbed by body tissues effectively killing cells and/oraltering genes so that they can no longer multiply. Radia-tion dose is often fractionated, or divided out over thetreatment period, in an effort to limit damage to the skin(Von der Maase 1994). Radiation works in distinct ways todamage the cell DNA, and repeated exposures do not allowtime for cells to repair tissue or DNA damage. Chua et al.demonstrate with their work in 2011 that there is a preven-tion of cellular replication, and thus, the cancer cells stopgrowing or die when their DNA is damaged. Radiation skininjury occurs in about 95% of patients undergoing radia-tion treatment for cancer (Salvo et al. 2010, McQuestion2011).Lopez et al. (2005, pp. R697) identified that radiation-induced DNA damage to lymphocytic cells in the irradiatedarea has three possibilities as a result of radiotherapy:1 Grow, divide and heal - what is now an acute injury;2 Not grow but stay alive - and be senescent;3 Stay alive for a long time with the important immunolog-ical changes - dying and disappearing slowly and becom-ing the focus for the delayed changes in tissue.ThisconceptechoedbyDenhamandHauer-Jensen(2002) considers that the radiotherapeutic injury is a
complex simultaneous interactive process involving repeti-tive traumatic injuries that perpetuates ongoing progressionof injury, possibly over years. During each exposure, whilst'the amount of energy deposited is minimal, it inflicts con-siderable injury'. The resultant effect is that therapeuticallyirradiated patients can be left with damage to normal tissueover time and may contribute to delayed radiation injury tothe epidermis.In an ongoing effort to minimise the damage to healthytissue,contemporarytechnologiesallowtheradiationoncology team to pinpoint the radiation beam to withinone millimetre of the malignant cells. Lopez et al. (2005)suggest this significantly reduces the potential for damageto normal tissue or 'bystander' damage. El-Bared et al.(2015) indicate that with radiation therapy advances, thereis 'skin-sparing' delivery of radiotherapy; these advancespermit the delivery of high doses of radiation therapy tothe tumour while avoiding critical structures. Sridhar andSymonds acknowledge that dose distribution based onhighly accurate magnetic resonance imaging and computedtomography machinery is reported to assist in reducing thevolume of normal tissue irradiated by up to 50%. Applica-tion of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) usedin conjunction with the more sophisticated image-guidedradiotherapy (www.gov.uk) is considered to be essential tofurther progress the technical aspect of treatment of malig-nant disease. Gaspar and Ding (2008) identify that the goalof IMRT is to increase the radiation dose to the areas thatneed it and reduce radiation exposure to specific sensitiveareas of surrounding normal tissue. While it is acknowl-edged that there is potential for scatter or geographical mis-match due to actual tissue density, this much improved'target-specific beam' and sophisticated technology is ofbenefit to the patient and significantly reduces the amountof epithelial damage.Skin irritation/damage is noted to be present in almost allpatients in the acute or immediate first stages of radiother-apy treatment. Salvo et al. (2010) suggest the severity ofthe skin irritation is highly variable and can range fromdermatitis, which is reported by most patients to be uncom-fortable but manageable. D'haese et al. (2010) and Chenet al. (2010) go further and report damage inclusive ofcomplete skin breakdown and ulceration. Sitton (1992) andHymes et al. (2006) suggest radiation damage is evidentthrough a demonstrated reduction in the basal cell layerproliferation which manifests as erythema, dry or moistdesquamation,changesinpigmentation,epilationandfinally skin integrity breakdown.Radiation therapy can be responsible for acute anddelayed skin damage plus loss or disruption of vasculature
to the bone and soft tissue. Lubek et al. (2013) identifiedthat complications can appear such as osteoradionecrosis,radiation-induced cystitis or proctitis, which will have along-term effect on patients' lives. Radvasky et al. (2013)state that acute tissue damage may occur immediately afterthe first dose of radiation is received but takes 2-3 weeksto become visible. Radvasky et al. (2013, pp. 1) furthersuggest that 'multiple treatment and individual patient-related factors contribute to the severity of radiation-asso-ciated injuries'.Sridhar and Symonds (2008) acknowledge that damageinvolves inflammatory responses affecting cellular compo-nents of the epidermis, dermis and vasculature presentingas mild erythema, dry and moist desquamation, or actualulceration. Chen et al. (2010) comment that delayed skineffects of radiotherapy differ from the acute phase in thattheycanbeinsidiouslyprogressiveappearingfrom10 weeks postradiotherapy to months or years post-ther-apy. Ho et al. (2010) remark that patients are survivinglonger post-treatment of their primary malignancy; there-fore, adverse effects of radiation therapy are being 'increas-ingidentified'.Itispossible;asTheChristieNHSFoundation Trust (2015) suggests that the medical profes-sion although not fully cognisant or appreciative of thecomplexity of these long-term effects on patients is endeav-ouring to further research this area. As radiotherapy is mostoften undertaken on an outpatient basis, the vital supportand guidance, from healthcare professionals, both on-siteand in the community becomes essential.Aguilar et al. (2013), Oanta and Irimie (2012) and Zhuet al. (2012) all report on smaller groups of patients report-edly suffering from 'radiation recall phenomenon or recalldermatitis'.Thispatientdemographichasundergonechemotherapy and/or radiotherapy with minor skin disrup-tion and later suffered skin breakdown when a second oradditional course of chemotherapy has begun. As Singeret al. (2004) suggests radiation recall dermatitis, patients'actual skin breakdown is in the initial beam site, with rapidescalation in severity which causes complex changes thatrequire prompt assessment and ongoing treatment.Accurate assessment of skin damage forms an importantfoundation for developing management strategies aimed atrelieving patients' symptoms. Several reference tools havebeen developed to assist the clinician with this particularlyimportant aspect of patient care. Cox et al. (1995) com-ment on data emerging from medical groups includingRadiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) and the Euro-pean Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer(EORTC), which presents clear research-based methods forthe validation of skin assessment. Fasugba et al. (2014, p.
 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License366) provide commentary on the Fitzpatrick Scale as partof the routine assessment 'associated with planning for radi-ation therapy, clinical staff can inform patients if they areto be more or less likely to develop acute skin reactions ifthey fall into a particular Fitzpatrick skin type'. Golen et al.(2005) discuss that scales, such as the RTOG (V4), and theEORTC provide grading for acute as well as late tissue tox-icities which may potentially develop radiation injuries.Method
This integrative review was engaged to explore key areas ofskin management associated with radiotherapy by assessingliterature in the field, identifying related historic and recentwork and exploring the progression of recent publishedwork towards an end goal of empirical standardisation ofclinical practice (Russell 2005, Whittemore & Knafl 2005,Soares et al. 2014).The literature search for this review was conducted usingthreemaindatabasesPubMed/MEDLINE,HealthandMedical Complete (ProQuest) and Web of Science using thesearch terms: 'radiation', 'skin', 'skin/epidermal damage'using the Boolean 'AND' which found 3290, 463 and 4334articles, respectively, filters applied were English, scholarlyor peer-reviewed article. This search was repeated using'Radiotherapy' AND 'Skin' then 'radiation therapy' AND'skin'; no new articles were identified.An advanced search using the term 'acute radiation' AND'skin reaction' was cross-referenced, and a total of 4100 arti-cles were filtered by human subjects, English language andabstract, a broad publication date was applied as much ofthe seminal work in this field was published between 1965-1980. On review, 3143 articles were excluded as they wereanimal studies, non-English language, not focussed on exter-nal beam radiotherapy or were unpublished research, forexample conference abstracts. This resulted in 93 full-textarticles being assessed for eligibility of which 48 articles wereexcluded due to incorrect data sets, inability to gain full elec-tronic recovery or not published in a peer-reviewed journal.The final 45 articles were chosen for their comprehensive-ness, addition to the body of knowledge and concept deliv-ery. Four of the remaining five references were websites, andone was a contemporary chapter in a book. In keeping withthe concept theory of an integrative review, networking ofprofessional peers and colleagues added to the accumulateddata, giving additional weight to the clinical perspective usedto frame this work.All studies clearly identified study aims with appropriateresearch designs. The 45 articles used in this manuscriptconsisted of systematic reviews, randomised control trials,
practice guidelines, Delphi research, audits, case reports,websites, newsletters and a chapter from a book. (Fig. 1)Results and discussion
The RTOG was organised as a clinical cooperative groupfor the purpose of conducting radiation therapy researchand cooperative clinical investigations. The purpose of theRTOG Scoring Criteria's development was to allow aninternational registry to be established so as a cohesive setof data could be used in joint research studies. Cox et al.(1995) defined late effects of radiation in their seminalwork as 'cumulative effects seen in the window post radio-therapy' and highlight that lengthier periods of time arerequired to fully observe and assess the effects of radiother-apy. Ninety days is proffered as a potential marker for theentire score, not just skin damage.The RTOG score is noted to be predictive in nature, conse-quently recognising the need for a uniform manner in whichthe clinical effects of radiotherapy can be assessed. TheRTOG group went on to explore the need for exclusivity ofskin assessment and consequently developed the RTOG SkinAssessment Score, this was cleaved from the original scoreand is now colloquially referred to as the RTOG Score (Coxet al. 1995). The RTOG Score is based on five descriptors ofskin damage ranging from no skin damage (RTOG 0)through to ulceration bleeding and necrosis (RTOG 4).Rubin et al. (1995) note the progression of Cox's initial workas evidenced by the LENT-SOMA system which is a combi-nation of RTOG and EORTC.The LENT-SOMA (L = Late; E = Effects; NT = NormalTissue/S = Subjective;O = Objective;M = Management;A = Analytic) scale assesses the response of each organ or tis-sue to the radiotherapy received and has been in use since1995. Golen et al. (2005) present the LENT-SOMA systemas being able to accurately grade late-effect skin toxicities(grade 1-4), as each individual aspect assists in defining theoverall level of late radiation toxicity in normal tissues. Con-temporary clinical use of the LENT-SOMA scale has seen thismethod of skin assessment used effectively in assessing therequired interventions necessary for patients suffering fromconditions such as radiation-induced cystitis and proctitis.The National Cancer Institute in America published areview of LENT-SOMA scale in 2009 and devised a new sys-tem called CTCAE 4.0: (C = Common T = TerminologyC = Criteria for A = Adverse E = Events version 4). Wonget al. (2013) acknowledge that this is now a readily usedgrading system for acute skin toxicity resultant of radiationtherapy. CTCAE 4.0 is acknowledged by many experts to bethe most appropriate tool with an updated version (4.03)
CR Baines et al. 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons Licensenow in use as of June 2010 (National Cancer Institute,National Institutes of Health 2009). Chen et al. (2012) notesthat this grading system makes a valuable acknowledgment ofthe patient's activity of daily living and how skin reaction lim-its/impacts on tasks such as shopping and bathing - a compo-nent not wholly replicated in the other grading systems.Structure of the assessment toolMany of the skin damage assessment tools are practitioneror observer based and as such does not capture symptomsor the impact of skin reactions from the patients' perspec-tive. Feight et al. (2011) highlight that there are widedisparities and irregularities in skin damage between practi-tioners employed within the same health organisation orspecialty department. Skin can appear different in differentlight, different room temperature (vasodilation) and atdifferent times of the day with the general health of theindividual patient bearing an impact.Daly et al. (2003) comment on miscellaneous physiologi-cal factors such as anaemia, increased melanin pigmenta-tion and oedema, which can 'hide' the appearance oferythema, thus disguising radiotherapy damage to skin.
Mattsson et al. (1996) work with digital image analysisidentified showed that 'digital image analysis is a noninva-sive technique allowing repetitive and quantitative analysisof skin erythema which can be used to monitor pathophysi-ological changes in the body'. Wengstrom et al. (2004)proffer that digital photography and reflectance spectrome-try provide this same opportunity although notes a digitalcamera is often more acceptable in providing high-qualityreplicable photographic data. Fullerton et al. (1996) suggestthat for digital photography to be consistent, the environ-mental lighting is vital, as colour transference becomeshighly variable in different illumination, thus causing diffi-culties in reliance of captured data. Daniel et al. (2009) intheir work on measuring skin colour and damage suggestthat digital colour analysis is an additional variable thatmay require management if applied to this patient group.Setaro and Sparavigna (2002) undertook a study on theability of digital cameras and computer-based colour analy-sis to reliably demonstrate erythema characteristics. Theysuggested that the raised level of haemoglobin in erythema(which is an index of haemoglobin relative to melanin) canconfuse the absorbed red light and reflected green light andconcluded that this may misrepresent the data obtained andArticles identified through database searching(n = 4100)Additional records identified through web databases and reference books(n = 5)Records after duplicates removed(n = 3400)Records screened(n = 3236)Records excludednon-English, animal studies, different type of radiotherapy(n = 3143)Full-text articles assessed for eligibility(n = 93)
Full-text articles excluded, with reasons(n = 48)Classification, nonpeer reviewed, correctness of data, IT recovery Studies included in this analysis as fulfilled review criteria(n = 45)(4) four website database were included(1) Chapter from a clinical reference book was includedDiscursive paperSkin damage associated with radiotherapy 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
may possibly require computer software adaptations toensure accuracy.Denham and Hauer-Jensen (2002) offer commentary onthe concept of using an ordinance scale verses a continuoussampling instrument, such as the laser Doppler for skinassessment, concluding that the skins' inflammatory reac-tion can greatly '. . .amplify radiation induced microvascularinjury'. Recently, Borzdynski et al. (2015, pp. 5) demon-strated a correlation between biophysical measures such aserythema with visual assessment. Pancorbo-Hidalgo et al.(2006) provide a systematic review on the risk assessmentscales for pressure ulcers using the Norton score - a well-established pressure injury predictive scale. Courage +Khazaka Electronics (2013) released the SD202 a highlysensitive, noninvasive skin diagnostic device suitable forassessing melanin pigmentation and erythema damage inthe skin. This technology further enhances the capability ofnoninvasive devices to be established for the task of consis-tent skin assessments.Clinical judgement has anecdotally been reported by thepractitioner as a more effective way of identifying patientswho will develop a radiation-induced skin damage, poten-tially more so than the using either the RTOG or EORTC.Oddie et al. (2014) surveyed 22 registered nurses workingsolely in radiation therapy across three (3) Magnet Hospi-tals in the USA, they were asked if they used skin assess-ment scores; the response was 455% reporting not at all.Samuriwo and Dowding (2014) noted that differences ineither the clinical judgement or decision-making process ofa nurse may influence the care that patients receive postin-jury. Ho et al. (2010) acknowledge that there is an estab-lished weakness in the application of toxicity grading scalesby health professionals. This variability is further com-pounded when multiple skin inspections are undertaken bya number of different practitioners, potentially detractingfrom the integrity of the assessment tool by adding inter-rater reliability as a confounding factor.
Wider concepts effecting skin assessmentPeters (2012) acknowledges there has been a renewed inter-est in the subjective health and quality of life of patientsreceivingradiotherapytreatment.Perceivedskin-relatedinjury and the ongoing debilitating realities of radiotherapyneed to be more inclusive of the patient's perspective. Baschet al. (2006) identified that patient-based questionnaires andself-reporting strategies may add value to capture individualsymptomology data specific to skin reactions during radio-therapy treatment. However, this type of methodologywouldmostlikelyrequiresignificantmanagementasAndreotti et al. (2015) comment, the cognitive decline ofpatients in coping with cancer is being increasingly identifiedas a significant impairment. Leonard (2010) reminds us thattoxicity scales may be useful but are 'unable to portray theday-to-day experience' particularly of living with effects ofradiation. Chan et al. (2014) report that although the sideeffects of radiation therapy are repeatedly acknowledged bypractitioners and patients, the prevention and treatment ofacute radiation-induced skin reactions as yet are not man-aged globally in a manner that reflects best practice.Conclusion
There is limited clinical or published evidence demonstrat-ing consistency of practice in the area of skin assessmentusing the RTOG or EORTC tools. Much of the examinedliterature addresses the development and application ofthese skin assessment scores but does not champion onesingular skin assessment tool to clinical practice. The resultsof this review suggest that although no single tool is recom-mended and practice is not yet standardised, assessmenttools can be used to identify those patients who requiremore in-depth clinical assessment to maintain integrity oftheir skin following external beam radiotherapy. To assistthe clinician definitive and interpretable information needsto be both validated and available.AcknowledgementsNo financial gain has been derived from this article.ContributionsData collection and analysis: CB and manuscript prepara-tion: CB, GAO.ReferencesAguilar J, Garcia E & Garcia-Garre E(2013) Capecitabine-induced radiationrecallphenomenon:acasereport.F1000Research 1, 1-6, [v2; ref status:indexed].Andreotti C, Root J, Ahles T, McEwen BS& Compas BE (2015) Cancer copingand cognition: a model for the role ofstressreactivityincancer-relatedcognitivedecline.Psycho-Oncology24, 617-623.Basch E, Iasonos A, McDonough T, BarzA, Culkin A, Kris MG, Scher H &SchragD(2006)PatientversusCR Baines et al. 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
clinician symptom reporting using theNational Cancer Institute common ter-minology criteria for adverse events:results of a questionnaire-based study.The Lancet. Oncology 7, 903-909.Bentzen SM (2006) Preventing or reducinglate side effects of radiation therapy:radiobiology meets molecular pathol-ogy. Nature Reviews Cancer 6, 702-713.Borzdynski C, McGuiness W & Miller C(2015) Comparing visual and objectiveskin assessment with pressure injuryrisk.InternationalWoundJournal.doi:10.1111/iwj.12468.Chan RJ, Webster J, Chung B, MarquartL, Ahmed M & Garantziotis S (2014)Preventionandtreatmentofacuteradiation-induced skin reactions: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis ofrandomised controlled trials. BioMedCentral Cancer 14, 1-19.Chen MF, Chen WC, Lai CH, Hung CH,Liu KC & Cheng YH (2010) Predic-tive factors of radiation-induced skintoxicityinbreastcancerpatients.BioMed Central Cancer 10, 1-9.Chen AP, Setser A, Anadkat MJ, Cotliar J,Olsen E, Garden BC & Lacouture ME(2012) Grading dermatologic adverseevents of cancer treatments: the Com-mon Terminology Criteria for AdverseEvents Version 4.0. Journal AmericanAcademy Dermatology 67, 1025-1039.Chua MKL, Somaiah N, Bourne S, DaleyF, A'Hern R, Nuta O, Davies S, Her-skind C, Pearson A, Warrington J,Helyer S, Owen R, Yarnold J & Roth-kamm K (2011) Inter-individual andinter-celltypevariationinresidualDNA damage after in vivo irradiationofhumanskin.RadiotherapyandOncology 99, 225-230.Courage+KhazakaElectronicsGmbH(2013) Courage and Khazaka Elec-tronicsGmbH:SkinAnalysisforScience, Dermatology and CosmeticConsultation. Pastiche Resources Ltd.Availableat:;khazaka.de/index.php/en/. (accessed 8January 2015).Cox JD, Stetz JA & Pajak T (1995) Toxic-ity criteria of the radiation therapyoncologyGroup(RTOG)andTheEuropeanorganisationforresearchand treatment of cancer (EORTC).InternationalJournalofRadiation
Oncology Biology Physics 31, 1341-1346.Daly T, Poulsen M, Denham J, Peters L,Lamb D, Krawitz H, Hamilton C,Keller J, Tripcony L & Walker Q(2003) The effect of anaemia on effi-cacy and normal tissue toxicity fol-lowingradiotherapyforlocallyadvanced squamous cell carcinoma ofthe head and neck. Radiotherapy andOncology 68, 113-122.Daniel L, Heckmann C, Kloss J & ManneS (2009) Comparing alternative meth-odsofmeasuringskincolour anddamage. Cancer Causes and Control20, 313-321.Denham JW & Hauer-Jensen M (2002)The radio-therapeutic injury - a com-plex wound. Radiotherapy and Oncol-ogy 63, 129-145.D'haese S, Van RoyM, Bate T, BijdekerkeP & Vinh-Hung V (2010) Manage-ment of skin reactions during radio-therapy in Flanders (Belgium): a studyof nursing practice before and afterthe introduction of a skin care proto-col. European Journal of OncologyNursing, 14, 367-372.El-Bared N, Wong P & Wang D (2015)Soft tissue sarcoma and radiation ther-apy advances, impact on toxicity. Cur-rent Treatment Options in Oncology16, 1-14.Fasugba O, Gardner A & Smyth W (2014)The Fitzpatrick skin type scale: a relia-bility and validity study in womenundergoingradiationtherapyforbreast cancer. Journal of Wound Care23, 358-368.Feight D, Baney T, Bruce S & McQuestionM (2011) Putting evidence into prac-tice: evidence based interventions forradiation dermatitis. Clinical Journalof Oncology Nursing 15, 481-492.Feldmeier JJ (2004) Hyperbaric oxygen fordelayed radiation injuries. Underseaand Hyperbaric Medicine Spring 31,133-145.Fullerton A, Fischer T, Lahti A, WilhelmKP, Takiwaki H & Serup J (1996)Guidelines for measurement of skincolour and erythema. Contact Der-matitis 35, 1-10.Gaspar LE & Ding M (2008) A review ofintensity-modulated radiation therapy.Current Oncology Reports 10, 294-299.
Golen M, Skladowski K, Wygoda A, Prze-orekW,PileckiB,SygulaM,Maciejewski B & Kolosza Z (2005) Acomparison of two scoring systems forlate radiation toxicity in patients afterradiotherapy for head and neck can-cer. Reports on Practical Oncologyand Radiotherapy 10, 179-192.Ho KF, Farnell DJJ, Routledge JA, BurnsMP, Sykes AJ, Slevin NJ & DavidsonSE (2010) Comparison of patient-re-ported late treatment toxicity (LENT-SOMA) with quality of life (EORTCQLQ-C30 and QLQ-H&N35). Assess-ment after head and neck radiother-apy. Radiotherapy and Oncology 97,270-275.Hymes SR, Strom EA & Fife C (2006)Radiation dermatitis: clinical presenta-tion, pathophysiology, and treatment.Journal American Academy Dermatol-ogy 54, 28-46.Koukourakis MI (2012) Radiation damageand radio-protectants: new concepts inthe era of molecular medicine. TheBritish Journal of Radiology 85, 313-330.Leonard K (2010) Late Effects of Radio-therapy, Newsletter Summer Edition.European Oncology Nursing Society,Designandproduction:HarrisDPI.pp. 10-13. www.harrisdpi.co.uk.Lopez E, Guerrero R, Nunez M, Moral R,VillalobosM,Martinez-GalanJ,Valenzuela M, Munoz-Gamez JA, Oli-ver FJ, Martin-Oliva D & Ruiz deAlmodovar JM (2005) Early and lateskinreactionstoradiotherapyforbreastcancerandtheircorrelationwith radiation-induced DNA damageinlymphocytes.BreastCancerResearch 7, R690-R698.LubekJ,HancockMK&StromeSE(2013) What is the value of hyperbaricoxygentherapyinmanagementofosteoradionecrosis of the head andneck? Laryngoscope 123, 555-556.Mattsson U, Jonsson A, Jontell M & Cas-suto J (1996) Digital image analysis(DIA) of colour changes in humanskin exposed to standardised thermalinjuryandcomparisonwithlaserDopplermeasurements.ComputerMethods and Programs in Biomedicine50, 31-42.McQuestion M (2011) Evidence-based skincare management in radiation therapy:Discursive paperSkin damage associated with radiotherapy
 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons Licenseclinical update. Seminars in OncologyNursing 22, 1-17.National Cancer Institute, National Insti-tutes of Health (2009) Common Ter-minology Criteria for Adverse Events(CTCAE) Version 4.0, U.S. Depart-ment of Health and Human Services. A & Irimie M (2012) Radiationrecall dermatitis induced by Tamox-ifen.BulletinoftheTransilvaniaUniversity Brasov 5, 113-115.Oddie K, Pinto M, Jollie S, Blasiak E,Ercolanon E & McCorkle R (2014)Identification of need for an evidence-basednurse-ledassessmentandmanagementprotocolforradiationdermatitis. Cancer Nursing 37, 37-42.Pancorbo-HidalgoPL,Garcia-FernandezFP,Lopez-MeninaIM&Alvarez-Nieto C (2006) Risk assessment scalesfor pressure ulcer prevention: a sys-tematic review. Journal of AdvancedNursing 54, 94-110.Peters EMJ (2012) Psychological supportof skin cancer patients. British Journalof Dermatology 167, 105-110.Radvasky LJ, Pace MB & Siddiqui A(2013) Prevention and management ofradiation-induced dermatitis, mucositisand xerostomia. American Journal ofHealth-System Pharmacy 70, 1025-1032.Rubin P, Constine LS, Fajardo LF, PhillipsTL & Wasserman TH (1995) Over-view: late effects of normal tissues(LENT) Scoring System. InternationalJournal of Radiation Oncology Biol-ogy Physics 31, 1041-1042.
Russell CL (2005) An overview of the inte-grative research review. Progress inTransplantation 15, 8-13.Salvo N, Barnes E, van Draanen J, StaceyE, Mitera G, Breen D, Giotis A, Czar-nota G, Pang J & De Angelis C(2010) Prophylaxis and managementof acute radiation-induced skin reac-tions: a systematic review of the litera-ture. Current Oncology 17, 94-112.Samuriwo R & Dowding D (2014) Nurses'pressure ulcer related judgements anddecisions in clinical practice: a system-atic review. International Journal ofNursing Studies 51, 1667-1685.Setaro M & Sparavigna A (2002) Quantifi-cation of erythema using digital cam-era and computer-based colour imageanalysis:amulticentrestudy.SkinResearch and Technology 8, 84-88.Singer EA, Warren RD, Pennanen MF, Col-lins BT & Hayes DF (2004) Tamox-ifen-induced radiation recall dermatitis.The Breast Journal 10, 170-171.Sitton E (1992) Managing Side Effects ofSkin Changes and Fatigue in NursingCare in Radiation Oncology, 2nd edn.W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.Soares CB, Hoga LAK, Peduzzi M, SangaletiC, Yonekura T & Silva RAD (2014)Integrative review: concepts and meth-ods used in nursing. Revista da Escolade Engermagem da USP 48, 329-339.Sridhar T & Symonds RP (2008) Principlesofchemotherapyandradiotherapy.Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Repro-ductive Medicine 19, 61-67.Tahir ARM, Westhuyzen J, Dass J, CollinsMK, Webb R, Hewitt S, Fon P &McKay M (2015) Hyperbaric oxygentherapy for chronic radiation-induced
tissueinjuries:Australasia'slargeststudy. Asia Pacific Journal of ClinicalOncology 11, 68-77.TheChristieNHSFoundationTrust(2015) Available at:  13 March 2015).The World Health Organisation - Interna-tional Agency for Research on Cancer,Globocan2012:EstimatedCancerIncidence, Mortality and PrevalenceWorldwidein2012.Availableat: (accessed 12 April 2016).Von der Maase H (1994) Complications ofcombinedradiotherapyandchemotherapy. Seminars in RadiationOncology 4, 81-94.Wengstrom Y, Forsberg C, Naslund I &Bergh J (2004) Quantitative assess-ment of skin erythema due to radio-therapy-evaluationofdifferentmeasurements.RadiotherapyandOncology 72, 191-197.Whittemore R & Knafl K (2005) The inte-grative review: updated methodology.JournalofAdvancedNursing52,546-553.Wong RKS, Bensadoun RJ, Boers-Doets CB,Bryce J, Chan A, Epstein JB, Eaby-Sandy B & Lacouture ME (2013) Clini-cal practice guidelines for the preven-tion and treatment of acute and lateradiation reactions from the MASCCskin toxicity study group. SupportiveCare in Cancer 21, 2933-2948.Zhu S, Yuan Y & Xi Z (2012) Radiationrecall reaction: two case studies illus-trating an uncommon phenomenon sec-ondary to anti-cancer agents. CancerBiology & Medicine 9, 202-204.CR Baines et al. 13652702, 2017, 7-8, Downloaded from  by Western University, Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
