Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found Journal of Cosmetic and Laser TherapyISSN: 1476-4172 (Print) 1476-4180 (Online) Journal homepage: A systematic review of microwave-based therapyfor axillary hyperhidrosisTzu-Herng Hsu, Yu-Tsung Chen, Yu-Kang Tu & Chien-Nien LiTo cite this article: Tzu-Herng Hsu, Yu-Tsung Chen, Yu-Kang Tu & Chien-Nien Li (2017) Asystematic review of microwave-based therapy for axillary hyperhidrosis, Journal of Cosmeticand Laser Therapy, 19:5, 275-282, DOI: 10.1080/14764172.2017.1303168Published online: 17 Apr 2017.Submit your article to this journal Article views: 667View related articles View Crossmark dataCiting articles: 10 View citing articles A systematic review of microwave-based therapy for axillary hyperhidrosisTzu-Herng Hsua, Yu-Tsung Chenb,c, Yu-Kang Tud, and Chien-Nien Lib,e,f
aSchool of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; bDepartment of Dermatology, Shuang Ho Hospital, TaipeiMedical University, Taipei, Taiwan; cSchool of Public Health, College of Public Health and Nutrition, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan;dDepartment of Public Health, Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei,Taiwan; eGraduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; fKuanshi clinicABSTRACTObjective: To systematically analyse the literature on the use of the microwave-based device forsubdermal thermolysis of the axilla and its efficacy for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis.Materials and methods: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed, Embase, SCOPUS andCochrane databases on 2 June 2016. The inclusion criteria including: (1) studies with human subjects, (2)full-text articles published in English, (3) a microwave-based device used to treat axillary hyperhidrosisand (4) trials that precisely evaluated axillary hyperhidrosis. Exclusion criteria were the following: (1)studies that did not fit the inclusion criteria mentioned above and (2) case reports and reviews.Results: We reviewed five clinical trials and 189 patients, all of which were published between 2012 and2016. There was one randomized controlled trial, one retrospective study and the remainder wereprospective studies. Although all of the studies were conducted with a small sample size, the resultsindicated that microwave-based device treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis had long-term efficacy withmild adverse effects. In addition, most patients were satisfied with the outcomes in these studies.Conclusions: Microwave-based device treatment may be an effective alternative treatment for axillaryhyperhidrosis. However, further investigation is necessary to determine its long-term efficacy and safety.
ARTICLE HISTORYReceived 22 June 2016Accepted 2 March 2017KEYWORDSAxillary hyperhidrosis;bromhidrosis; hyperhidrosis;microwave; osmidrosisIntroductionAxillary hyperhidrosis is a common problem presenting in 73%of patients with hyperhidrosis and is found in 1.4% of thepopulation of the USA (1,2). The precise mechanism of thecondition is not fully understood, and overstimulation of theeccrine sweat glands is thought to be the cause. Axillary hyper-hidrosis is not a life-threatening disease, but it can be a substan-tial burden, affecting relationships with other people, leisureactivities, emotional well-being and self-esteem (3). There areseveral treatments of axillary hyperhidrosis, including topicaland injectable agents, oral medication, surgical methods andlaser treatment (4). However, non-invasive treatments onlyhave temporary effects, and invasive treatments are limited bytheir complications (5). Although good efficacy has beenreported for laser treatment, insertion of the laser fibre into thesubdermal space may lead to complications if the procedure isnot well conducted (6). The microwave-based device, which wasintroduced by Johnson and colleagues in 2012, has beenapproved by the United States Food and Drug Administration(7). Using a microwaves-based device, the water-rich dermis andsweat glands can be selectively heated by the physical rotation ofhigh dipole molecules. A prior randomized, blinded, multicentrestudy also proved the high efficacy of microwave technology (8).However, other studies were reported using a small sample size,and there are no published systematic reviews that have evalu-ated this method for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. Theaim of this study was to systematically synthesize the literature
on the use of a microwave-based device and its efficacy for thetreatment of axillary hyperhidrosis.MethodsData sourcesThe PubMed, Embase, Scopus and Cochrane databases weresearched for studies published during the period up to 2 June2016. The following medical search headings terms, words andcombinations of words were used in the systematic search: 'brom-hidrosis' or 'osmidrosis' or 'hyperhidrosis' and 'axilla' or 'axillae'or 'axillary'. All included studies were also entered into thePubMed 'similar articles' function and the science citation index.Moreover, we identified additional studies by manually searchingthe reference sections of these papers and by contacting knownexperts in the field. Finally, unpublished trials were retrieved fromthe ClinicalTrials.gov registry ( This sys-tematic review has been accepted by Prospero, an online interna-tional prospective register of systematic reviews that is curated bythe National Institute for Health Research (CRD42016039886).Study selection and data extractionThe following studies were included in the analysis: (1)studies with human subjects; (2) full-text articles publishedin English; (3) microwave-based device used to treat axillaryhyperhidrosis; and (4) trials that precisely evaluated axillaryCONTACT Chien-Nien of Dermatology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.(c) 2017 Taylor & Francis
hyperhidrosis. Exclusion criteria were: (1) studies that did notfit the inclusion criteria mentioned above and (2) case reportsand reviews.Two independent reviewers (T. H. Hsu and Y. K. Tu)extracted the data from the trials, including the participants,inclusion and exclusion criteria, administration of therapy,prevalence and assessment of axillary hyperhidrosis, and com-plications. Discrepancies and any disagreements were resolvedthrough discussion with a third reviewer (C. N. Lee). Theauthors of the studies were contacted for additional informa-tion when necessary.Data synthesis and analysisThe identified studies were reviewed systematically. The fol-lowing information was extracted from each study: year andregions, study design, interventions, follow-up duration, treat-ment protocol, treatment contents, major inclusion/exclusioncriteria, treatment, baseline patient characteristics, subjectiveand objective outcomes measures, results and adverse events.ResultsCharacteristics of the trialsThe review process is outlined in Figure 1. The initial searchyielded 2012 studies, 1985 of which were deemed ineligiblethrough screening of titles and abstracts. Subsequently, thefull text of 37 studies was screened. Of these, ten were full textnot published, nine were excluded because they were reviewarticles, six did not meet the eligibility criteria because ofduplicate publication, four did not use microwave treatment,and three did not treat axillary hyperhidrosis. Thus, fiveeligible trials were included in this systematic review (8-12).
The main characteristics of the analysed studies are listed inAll the studies included only adults and required patientsto have symptomatic axillae of either hyperhidrosis or osmi-drosis (Table 2). The median age of participants in the studieswas between 30 and 37 years, although the age range variedamong each study. Patients with axillary hyperhidrosis wereall evaluated by the Hyperhidrosis Disease Severity Scale(HDSS) and had an HDSS score of 3 or 4. Glaser et al. andHong et al. used the gravimetric reading of axillary hyperhi-drosis, which is an objective measure, and the patients had amean baseline gravimetric reading of 179.4 and 190 mg/5min, respectively. Three studies excluded patients who treatedtheir axillary hyperhidrosis with surgery in the past or withbotulinum toxin injection 12 months before the study. On theother hand, one study included patients in which previousSearch for potentially relevant trials (n = 2012)Studies retrieved for furtherevaluation (n = 37)Additional studies identified throughScopus and searching of reference sections (n = 1)Included studies (n = 5)Studies identified through PubMed, Embase, and Cochranedatabases (n = 2011)Studies excluded after reading their titles and abstractsNot relevant (n = 1985)Excluded studiesReview article (n = 9)Non-treated axillary hyperhidrosis (n = 3)Full text not published (n = 10)No microwave treatment (n = 4)Duplicate articles (n = 6)Author[Year]RegionStudy designInterventionFollow-up durationTreatment protocolTreatment contentUnitedStatesRandomizedplacebo-controlledtrialn = 81 (162 axillae)n = 39 (78 axillae)Microwave group:3, 6, 9 and 12 moand 6 moThree procedure sessions were administered atabout 2-wk interval.Fewer procedure sessions
were allowed if the subject's underarm sweateliminated with each session or if the subjectdeclined.Microwave group:the device included integrated vacuum and cooling (DTS G2 System;all steps were same as above, but microwave energy was not delivered.CanadaProspectiveMicrowave group:1, 3, 6 and 12 moafter their lastproceduresession.The treatment started with the first procedurevisit.Subsequent treatments were heldapproximately every 30 d after sweatassessments and safety evaluation.At most, three procedure sessions were allowed,and all procedures completed within a 6-monthwindow.Marking the axillastarch-iodine test (An alcohol-based iodine mixture was wiped on theskin of the axilla, and then corn starch was sprinkled on the area)Local anaesthesia1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrineMicrowave deviceKoreaProspectivesingle-armobservationalstudyMicrowave group:7 mo afterAll subjects underwent one microwaveMarking the axillaLocal anaesthesiamixture of normal saline, 100 cc; epinephrine,0.2 cc; 2% lidocaine, 10 cc; and bivon, 1 ccMicrowave devicean electromagnetic signal with a frequency between 300 MHz andTaiwanProspectivesingle-armobservationalstudyMicrowave group:n = 71 and 3 mo aftertreatmentTwo procedure sessions were administered at 3mo intervals.Marking the axillanot knownLocal anaesthesia1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrineMicrowave deviceMiramar Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA); Energy levels 3 and 5 were set forfirst and second treatmentAustralia Retrospectivesingle-armobservationalstudyMicrowave group:Average 5 mo(range from 1 toAll subjects underwent at least one microwave
Fifteen patients returned for the secondMarking the axillastarch-iodine testLocal anaesthesia0.05% lignocaineMicrowave deviceThe machine emits a constant frequency of 5800 MHzMost of the patients were treated with Level 3 or 4 at the initial visit andLevel 4 or 5 at the final visit (Level from 1 to 5 increased with longerperiod and more heat)d, days; mo, months; SD, standard deviation.treatments with topical agents had failed, and the remainingone did not mention the previous treatment of patients.The administration of a microwave-based device also variedregarding frequency and treatment intervals. The interventionranged from a single administration to three times during thecourse of treatment. The interval ranged from two weeks tothree months if multiple administrations were implemented.With respect to the outcomes assessed in these studies, allstudies included adverse events and function measures(Table 3). All studies included HDSS, two also used a gravi-metric assessment for axillary hyperhidrosis, and one studymeasured sweat reduction by the patient's estimates. In addi-tion, three studies also evaluated osmidrosis with subject-reported odour evaluation, odour grade and odour-10 score,respectively. Only one study used Dermatologic Life QualityIndex (DLQI) to evaluate quality of life. Histological studieswere also performed in three studies, and only one study hada full description of the results of these histological analyses(11). Two studies obtained patient satisfaction, and only onestudy used a pain scale to evaluate postoperative pain.Outcome associated with microwave-based devicetherapyRegardless of the outcome measures, all studies demonstratedthe efficacy of microwave therapy for the reduction of sweat-ing among patients with axillary hyperhidrosis (Table 3). Theonset of the effects of treatment was not described in full
detail in all studies (efficacy prior to the completion of theprocedure was not described); however, it appears that theeffects exhibited long-term stability. Subjective outcomeHDSS in all studies demonstrated at least a one-point decreasein most patients throughout the follow-up duration. In addi-tion, there was at least a two-point drop in HDSS that wasalso revealed in some studies (9-11); 86% (11), 83.3% (10) and55% (9) of subjects had at least a two-point decrease at the 3-,7- and 12-month follow-up visit, respectively. There were twostudies that conducted statistical analyses in HDSS. In theonly RCT, the percentage of subjects that decreased by atleast two points in the HDSS in microwave group was statis-tically greater than that in the control group through the six-month follow-up period (8). The other study found that thepost-treatment mean HDSS points were statistically signifi-cantly lower than the points for the pretreatment (12). Theobjective outcome gravimetric assessment was performed intwo studies. In one study, the authors found that there was atleast 80 and 62% patients who had no less than 50 and 75%sweat reduction, respectively, at the 30-day visits (8). Theresults reached statistical significance between the microwaveand control group when comparing the proportion of patientswho had at least a 75% sweat reduction (8). However, therewas no statistical significance at the later time points up to sixmonths (8). In another study, at least 90% of patients hadgreater that 50% sweat reduction, and the average sweatreduction was at least 82% during the 12-month follow-upvisits (9). Moreover, in one study, patients estimated sweatStudy[Year]Inclusion criteria/exclusion criteriaPatient baseline characteristicsGlaser et al (8)No. of patients (male %): 81 (33)Median age: 33 yHDSS score (No. of patients): 3 (41), 4 (40)Mean baseline gravimetric reading: 180.5 mg/5 min
No. of patients (male %): 39 (47)Median age: 31 yHDSS score: 3 = 26, 4 = 13Mean baseline gravimetric reading: 177.2 mg/5 minHong et al (9)(1) Inclusion criteria: Subjects had a HDSS score of 3 or4 and had baseline axillary sweat production ofgreater than 50 mg/5 min as measured by gravi-metric readings(2) Exclusion criteria: Subjects had prior surgery orbotulinum toxin injections to treat PAH within thepast 12 moNo. of patients (male %): 31 (26)Median age (range): 33 y (18-65)HDSS score (No. of patients): 3 (20), 4 (11)Mean baseline gravimetric reading: 190 mg/5 minMean baseline dermatologic life quality index: 11.8Lee et al (10)(1) Inclusion criteria: Patients with significant axillaryhyperhidrosis or osmidrosis were recruitedNo. of patients (male %): 11 (27)Median age (range): 37 y (20-52)Diagnosis: Hyperhidrosis = 3, Osmidrosis = 5, both = 3HDSS score (No. of patients): 3 (3), 4 (3)Odor grade (No. of patients): 3 (1), 4 (7)Chang et al (11)(1) Inclusion criteria: Subjects had a HDSS score of 3 or4 and at least 5 on the Odor-10 scale.(2) Exclusion criteria: No patient had been treated withendoscopic thoracic sympathectomy, liposuction orother surgeries for axillary osmidrosis or hyperhi-drosis. They had no botulinum toxin injectionwithin 1 year and had not used any topical treat-ment within 14 d prior to treatment.
No. of patients (male %): 7 (2.8)Median age (range): 31 y (22-53)Mean BMI (kg/m2): 21.1HDSS score (No. of patients): 3 (2), 4 (5)Odor-10 grade (No. of patients): 5 (1), 6 (1), 8 (2), 9 (2), 10 (1)Scuderi et al (12)(1) Inclusion criteria: patients with HDSS ratings threeand aboveNo. of patients (male %): 20 (55)Median age (range): 30 y (19-45)Mean HDSS score: 3.75 +- 0.44All patients had failed previous treatments with topical agents.d, days; mo, months; y, years old; DLQI, Dermatologic Life Quality Index; HDSS, Hyperhidrosis Disease Severity Scale; PAH, primary axillary hyperhidrosis.Glaser et al (8)HDSSGravimetricHDSS:There were no procedure-related serious adverse events reported in the study forany subject.At 30 d, HDSS in 89% of microwave group and 54% of control group weredecreased to 1 or 2 (p < 0.001).Through the 6 months, the HDSS efficacy (HDSS decreased >=2 or HDSS score = 1or 2) for the microwave group was statistically significantly greater than theAltered sensation, pain/soreness, swelling, blister/burn/ulceration, skin rash/irritation/dermatitis, axillary bumps/nodules and compensatory sweating werereported in these studies.
One year after treatment, the HDSS efficacy of microwave group continued to bestable.The most frequently reported adverse event (9.9% of treated subjects) was alteredsensation in a moderately sized area (average 12-cm length at onset).Gravimetric assessment:All the adverse effects disappeared within 30 d in average except for alteredsensation (with mean 67.4 d).At 30 d, a reduction >= 50% in sweat was seen in 80% of patients in microwavegroup and 67% of control group (p = 0.07); a reduction >= 75% sweat was seenin 62% of patients in microwave group and 39% in control group (p = 0.01).At later time points, there was no statistically significant difference ingravimetrically measured sweat reduction between the two groupsHong et al (9)odour evaluationassessmenteffects were resolved.At all follow-up visits, more than 90% of patients had decreased HDSS score >=1point.At the final 12-mo visit, 94% (29/31) of the subjects had at least a 1-point dropin HDSS and 55% (17/31) had a 2-point drop or greater in HDSS.discomfort in 90, 87 and 84% of patients, respectively.At all follow-up visits, >= 90% of patients had 50% or greater reduction ingravimetric assessment.The average reduction in sweat for all patients was 83, 82, 82 and 82% at the 1-,37 d, range 4 d to 4 mo) and palpable bumps (median duration was 41 d) in 65and 71% patients, respectively. Axillary hair loss was reported by 26% of subjects.One subject experienced transient neuropathy which resolved at 6 mo.A sample was taken in one axilla 105 d after the lasttreatment, with no sweat glands evident.There were at least 5 points reduction in 96, 89, 89 and 85% of subjects at the 1-,9.6 and 9.9 points for the 1-, 3-, 6- and 12-mo visits, respectively.There were 90, 96, 93 and 88.5% subjects reported being very satisfied at 1-, 3-,6- and 12-mo visitsThere were 67.7, 71.0, 74.2 and 61.3% of subjects who had no noticeable odour(baseline was 12.9%) at 1-, 3-, 6- and 12-mo visitsLee et al (10)
HDSSOdour grade (with4 grades)BiopsyHDSS:One patient complained of loss of sensation and fully recovered in 3 mo.One patient reported skin sagging in both arms that disappeared after 2 mo.At the 7-month follow-up visit, there were 83.3% (10/12 axillae) of subjects whohad at least a 2-point drop.Odour grade:One patient had hyperpigmentation, which resolved after 2 mo.There were 93.8% (15/16 axillae) of subjects who had at least a 1-grade drop,and 91.3% (13/16 axillae) of subjects who had at least a 2-grade drop.Biopsy:Patients experienced transient adverse effects such as pain (n = 2), tension (n = 2),edema (n = 3)Six months after treatment, specimens from the axillary skin of one patientshowed no sweat glands.and nodules (n = 1), which all disappeared within 10 d.(Continued)Study[Year]SubjectiveoutcomeObjectiveoutcomeResultsAdverse effectsChang et al (11)HDSSsatisfactionpain scaleBiopsyHDSS:Pain scale:At 30 days, 57 and 86% of subjects had at least a 2-point and 1-point drop,respectively, and one person had no drop point after treatment.Postoperative median pain scales were 7 and 6 in first and second proceduresession, respectively, and both decreased no more than 2 points inpostoperative day 6.At 90 days, 86 and 100% of subjects had at least a 2-point and 1-point drop,respectively.
Other common adverse events included local erythema, bruise, local swelling,numbness and hypotrichosis. Erythema and bruises were presented in all patientsand resolved in a few days. Local swelling mostly went away in 1-2 weeks. Threeexisted up to their 90-d follow-up visit.The mean percentage of reduction in odour-10 scale was 76.4% and 61.8% at30-day and 90-day visits, respectively.Biopsy:No severe and debilitating adverse effects wereobserved. All patients showed good tolerance during all treatment and follow-upvisitsMean reduction in the area of apocrine sweat glands was 9.61 mm2 (95%confidence interval, 6.35-12.87 mm2) and 93% (95% confidence interval, 86.3-99.7%) in percentage.There were significant differences between pre- and postoperative AAG andAAG/TAT ratio (p = 0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively), which represented asubstantial decrease of apocrine glands.Patients satisfaction:Four out of seven participants were very satisfied, two participants weresatisfied, and only one patient was unsatisfied.Scuderi et al (12)HDSSquestionnaireMean HDSS:Short-term (% of patients):pretreatment = 3.75 +- 0.44pain (65%), swelling (60%), bruising (15%) and temporary numbness (20%)posttreatment = 1.75 +- 0.55 (p < 0.0001)mean sweat reduction based on the patient's estimation = 72.5% +- 14.82hair loss (25%) and nodule formation (25%)The average estimated sweat reduction of the short-term (3 mo or less) andlong-term (more than 3 mo and up to 12 mo) follow-up group was 74.3 and77.7%, respectively.The average return to complete physical activityd, days; mo, months; AAG, area of tissue containing apocrine gland; DLQI, Dermatologic Life Quality Index; HDSS, Hyperhidrosis Disease Severity Scale; TAT, total area of the tissue.reduction based on a questionnaire, and the results revealedan average of 74.3 and 77.7% sweat reduction in the short-term and long-term follow-up visits, respectively (12).With the exception of hyperhidrosis, the odour was also
evaluated in the three studies (9-11). There was 61.3-74.2% ofpatients who did not notice the odour (baseline was 12.9%)during the 12-month follow-up visits in one study (9). Theother study found that 91.3% of subjects had at least a two-grade drop in the odour grade (10). The remaining studiesused an odour-10 score to evaluate the odour, and the meanpercentage of reduction in the odour-10 scale was 76.4 and61.8% for the 30-day and 90-day visits, respectively (11).Histologic examinations were performed in three studies(9-11). Two of the studies took specimens from the axillaryskin of one patient separately, and both results revealed theabsence of sweat glands (9,10). The remaining study per-formed a histologic evaluation for every patient, and theresults showed average 9.61 mm2 and 93% of the reductionin the area of the apocrine sweat glands (11). The pre- andpostoperative AAG and AAG/TAT ratio, which represented asubstantial decrease of apocrine glands, also achieved a statis-tical difference in the same study (11).Other outcomes measurements were also performed in the
included studies. In one study, DLQI was used to evaluate thequality of life following treatment (9). The mean reduction ofDLQI was at least 9.9 points throughout the 12-month visits.More than 85% of patients were satisfied after treatment basedon the different satisfaction assessments of the two stu-dies (9,11).Adverse eventsShort-term adverse events, including pain, edema, blister/burn/ulceration, rash/irritation/dermatitis, tension, numbnessand compensatory sweating were reported in the analysedstudies, and most events resolved within 30 days. Long-termadverse events, including altered sensation, skin sagging,hypotrichosis, hair loss, hyperpigmentation, bumps/nodulesand neuropathy were reported in the studies, and most eventsresolved over the course of months. Swelling, pain, edema,hair loss, altered sensation and palpable bumps were the mostcommon and reported symptoms in the majority of thestudies.Discussion
Microwave-based devices have been gaining in popularity forthe treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis because of its non-invasive, simple features. Although this innovative approachhas demonstrated promising results in previous clinical stu-dies, its efficacy still varies between different studies. In thecurrent review, we systematically analysed the clinical evi-dence of the impact of microwave technology on the objectiveand subjective efficacy among patients with axillary hyperhi-drosis. In the included studies, points of the HDSS and gravi-metric assessment exhibited an obvious decrease, whichdisplayed improvement in axillary hyperhidrosis in both theobjective and subjective results. These results may be causedby a decrease in the number of sweat glands, which wererevealed in the histology results of the studies mentionedabove. However, one study showed no statistical differencesin the gravimetric assessment after 30-day follow-up visits (8).This may result from a different system of a microwavedevice, ethnic groups and a lack of temperature control dur-ing the assessment. Nevertheless, most studies exhibited botha short-term and a long-term improvement in axillary hyper-hidrosis. In addition to axillary hyperhidrosis, odour evalua-tion and patient satisfaction were also performed in somestudies that we included. Patients with malodour obtainedimprovement after treatment, and most patients were satisfiedwith the procedure. Therefore, microwave-based device treat-ment achieved improvement in both axillary hyperhidrosisand malodour. More importantly, the patients were satisfiedafter the treatment.
Despite the good efficacy of microwave-based device treat-ment, there were some common adverse effects reported inthe studies we analysed. Swelling, pain, edema, hair loss,altered sensation and palpable bumps were common andreported in the majority of the studies. There was also sub-stantial variation in the duration of the mild effects and typeof adverse effects between the various studies; however, mostof the adverse events resolved over time. These effects may bedue to a different system of microwave devices and protocolsused, different ethnic groups and the presence of subjectivebias. There were no procedure-related serious adverse eventsreported in the studies; only one person had treatment-relatedneuropathy, which resolved with six months (9). Overall, themicrowave-based device is a safety choice with mild sideeffects for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis.There are many treatments reported in the literature foraxillary hyperhidrosis, such as temporary treatments (e.g.,botulinum toxin and topical agents) and permanent treat-ments (e.g., excision with thoracic sympathectomy, subcuta-neousshaving,tumescentliposuctionwithorwithout
curettage and lasers used on the skin surface or subdermis)(4,13). Injections of botulinum toxin and topical agent treat-ments have also been found to be effective, but one should betreated repeatedly to maintain dryness. The effectiveness lastsbetween only four to nine months for botulinum toxin treat-ments (14-17), and topical agents should be applied withindays based on the type of treatment used (18-20). Permanenttreatment modalities exhibiting long-term efficacy have beenexplored in past studies, while the obvious adverse effects maylead these treatments to be unfavourable for many patients.Thoracic sympathectomy may lead to compensatory hyperhi-drosis, and there was a study reporting that 88% of patientssuffer from compensatory hyperhidrosis (21). Moreover, sub-cutaneous suction curettage is associated with pain, infection,hematoma and damage to the brachial plexus (22). Anothersurgical method can also result in infection, scars andrestricted arm movement (23). Specifically, the Nd:YAGlaser has been shown to reduce axillary hyperhidrosis recently;however, like other invasive treatments mentioned above, thisprocedure is associated with significant scarring, retractionand long recovery times (6,24). With long-term efficacy andmild side effects mentioned in this review, the microwave-based device may be a better choice for the treatment ofaxillary hyperhidrosis.This systematic review has found that the microwave
device is effective in the long-term follow-up for both sub-jective and objective results, with mild adverse events andhigh satisfaction. However, there are some limitations in thecurrent review, and our study highlighted several areas offuture research directions: (1) in the existing studies, therewas only one RCT, and all the studies are limited by a smallsample size. To further assess the value of microwave-baseddevice treatment in axillary hyperhidrosis, more multicentreRCTs with a large number of subjects are needed, particu-larly compared to the existing treatments; (2) not all studiesincluded in our review mentioned temperature, mood orother factors affecting sweating when evaluating the resultsof the studies. Thus, additional research should be conductedusing the same conditions in the future; (3) the longestfollow-up duration in the studies we investigated was onlyone year, while axillary hyperhidrosis is a long-term disease.Thus, clinical trials with longer follow-up periods arerequired in future studies.ConclusionSince Johnson and colleagues (7) introduced the use of a micro-wave device for the long-term treatment of axillary hyperhidro-sis, microwave treatment has become increasingly important forthe treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. This systematic reviewindicated that microwave-based device therapy of axillary hyper-hidrosis achieved long-term efficacy in both subjective andobjective results. Moreover, mild side effects were presented,and most patients were satisfied with this treatment. However,the clinical research on this topic remains extremely limited.Further investigation is necessary to determine the long-termefficacy and safety of this treatment modality.Acknowledgements
Hsu TH and Chen YT contributed equally to this work. Hsu TH and TuYK acquired, interpreted and analysed the data; Hsu TH and Chen YTdrafted the article; Li CN and Chen YT critically revised the manuscript;Li CN contributed to conception and design of the study and all authorsapproved the final version.Disclosure of interestsThe authors have no conflict of interest or financial ties to disclose.ORCIDReference1. Li X, Chen R, Tu YR, Lin M, Lai FC, Li YP, et al. Epidemiologicalsurvey of primary palmar hyperhidrosis in adolescents. Chin MedJ (Engl). 2007;120(24):2215-2217.2. Strutton DR, Kowalski JW, Glaser DA, Stang PE. US prevalence ofhyperhidrosis and impact on individuals with axillary hyperhidro-sis: results from a national survey. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;51(2):241-248.3. Hamm H. Impact of hyperhidrosis on quality of life and its4. Singh S, Davis H, Wilson P. Axillary hyperhidrosis: A review ofthe extent of the problem and treatment modalities. Surgeon.2015;13(5):279-285.5. Wu WH, Ma S, Lin JT, Tang YW, Fang RH, Yeh FL. Surgicaltreatment of axillary osmidrosis: an analysis of 343 cases. PlastReconstr Surg. 1994;94(2):288-294.6. Goldman A, Wollina U. Subdermal Nd-YAG laser for axillaryhyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(6):756-762.
7. Johnson JE, O'Shaughnessy KF, Kim S. Microwave thermolysis ofsweat glands. Lasers Surg Med. 2012;44(1):20-25.8. Glaser DA, Coleman WP, 3rd, Fan LK, Kaminer MS, Kilmer SL,Nossa R, et al. A randomized, blinded clinical evaluation of anovel microwave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis: thedermatologicreductioninunderarmperspirationstudy.9. Hong HC, Lupin M, O'Shaughnessy KF. Clinical evaluation of a10. Lee SJ, Chang KY, Suh DH, Song KY, Ryu HJ. The efficacy of amicrowave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis and osmidro-sis in Asians: a preliminary study. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2013;15(5):255-259.11. Chang Y-Y, Chen C-H, Hui RC-Y, Jung S-M, Yang C-H. A prospec-tive clinical and histologic study of axillary osmidrosis treated withthe microwave-based device. Dermatol Sin. 2015;33(3):134-141.12. Scuderi S, Manoharan P, Lim D, Manoharan S. A survey ofpatient satisfaction with use of microwave device for axillaryhyperhidrosis. Australas J Dermatol. In press, 2016.13. Brown AL, Gordon J, Hill S. Hyperhidrosis: review of recentadvances and new therapeutic options for primary hyperhidrosis.Curr Opin Pediatr. 2014;26(4):460-465.14. Heckmann M, Ceballos-Baumann AO, Plewig G, Hyperhidrosis15. Lowe NJ, Glaser DA, Eadie N, Daggett S, Kowalski JW, Lai PY,et al. Botulinum toxin type A in the treatment of primary axillaryhyperhidrosis: a 52-week multicenter double-blind, randomized,placebo-controlled study of efficacy and safety. J Am AcadDermatol. 2007;56(4):604-611.
16. Doft MA, Kasten JL, Ascherman JA. Treatment of axillary hyperhi-drosis with botulinum toxin: a single surgeon's experience with 53consecutive patients. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2011;35(6):1079-1086.17. Doft MA, Hardy KL, Ascherman JA. Treatment of hyperhidrosiswith botulinum toxin. Aesthet Surg J. 2012;32(2):238-244.18. HolzleE.Topicalpharmacologicaltreatment.CurrProbl19. Hoorens I, Ongenae K. Primary focal hyperhidrosis: current treat-ment options and a step-by-step approach. J Eur Acad DermatolVenereol. 2012;26(1):1-8.20. Mackenzie A, Burns C, Kavanagh G. Topical glycopyrrolate foraxillary hyperhidrosis. Br J Dermatol. 2013;169(2):483-484.21. de Andrade Filho LO, Kuzniec S, Wolosker N, Yazbek G,Kauffman P, Milanez de Campos JR. Technical difficulties andcomplications of sympathectomy in the treatment of hyperhidro-sis: an analysis of 1731 cases. Ann Vasc Surg. 2013;27(4):447-453.22. Wollina U, Kostler E, Schonlebe J, Haroske G. Tumescent suctioncurettage versus minimal skin resection with subcutaneous cur-ettage of sweat glands in axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg.2008;34(5):709-716.23. Bechara FG, Sand M, Hoffmann K, Boorboor P, Altmeyer P,Stuecker M. Histological and clinical findings in different surgicalstrategies for focal axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(8):1001-1009; discussion 9.24. Letada PR, Landers JT, Uebelhoer NS, Shumaker PR. Treatmentof focal axillary hyperhidrosis using a long-pulsed Nd: YAG1064 nm laser at hair reduction settings. J Drugs Dermatol.2012;11(1):59-63.
