journals.sagepub.com/home/lupPAPERManagement of cardiovascular risk in systemiclupus erythematosus: a systematic reviewC Andrades1, C Fuego2, S Manrique-Arija2 and A Ferna' ndez-Nebro21Departamento de Medicina y Dermatologi'a, Universidad de Ma' laga, Ma' laga, Spain; and 2UGC de Reumatologi'a, Instituto de Investigacio' nBiome' dica de Ma' laga (IBIMA) Hospital Regional Universitario de Ma' laga, Universidad de Ma' laga, Ma' laga, Spain
Systemic lupus erythematosus is associated with accelerated atherosclerosis and increased riskof cardiovascular complications. The aim of this study was to review the effectiveness ofinterventions for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events and mortalityand to review the effectiveness of interventions for cardiovascular risk factor reduction insystemic lupus erythematosus patients. A systematic review was conducted. Electronic data-bases Medline and Embase (1961-2015) were searched. Nineteen articles met the inclusioncriteria and were selected. Low-calorie and/or low glycaemic index calories may be a usefuloption for secondary prevention in obese patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, andexercise would be useful in improving the endothelial function measured by flow-mediateddilation in this group of patients. The use of lipid-lowering drugs may improve the lipid profilein patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and hyperlipidaemia, but the effect of thistreatment on overall cardiovascular mortality remains unknown. Antiplatelets, anticoagu-lants, antimalarials and lipid-lowering drugs may be effective in the primary and secondaryprevention of major cardiovascular events, such as acute myocardial infarction or stroke.Similarly, lipid-lowering drugs and antimalarial drugs appear to reduce the serum levels oftotal cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein, glucose, diastolic blood pressure and calcium depos-ition at the coronary arteries. They may also improve insulin resistance and the level of high-density lipoproteins. It appears that treatment with antihypertensive drugs reduces bloodpressure in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, but the available studies are of lowquality.Lupus (2017) 26, 1407-1419.Key words: Systemic lupus erythematosus; cardiovascular risk factors; cardiovascular events
IntroductionSystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemicautoimmune disease of variable clinical course thatprimarily affects women. The prevalence of SLE is91 per 100,000 people in Spain,1 with an estimatedincidence in Europe of 3.3 to 4.8 cases per 100,000inhabitants/year.2 The survival rate of SLE at 10years has significantly improved over the last 50years in Europe and now is at around 90%.3However, the long-term survival seems to haveremained stationary between 44 and 84% sincethe 1980s.4 The most common cause of latemortality in patients with SLE is cardiovasculardisease; an underlying chronic inflammatory statebeing key to the development of early atheroscler-osis.5 Van Leuven et al.6 suggested that the patho-physiologicalpathwaythatpromotesatherosclerosis begins years before the diagnosisof SLE, when the inflammatory process begins, sothat SLE itself should be considered as an inde-pendent cardiovascular risk factor (CVRF).7 Inaddition,acceleratedatherosclerosisinSLEappears to result from the interaction of multipletraditional CVRFs and factors related to SLEitself.8Although it is well established that various pre-ventive measures effectively reduce the impact ofCVRFs in the general population, their effective-ness has not been recognized in patients withSLE. Given the high morbidity and mortality ofcardiovascular disease in these patients, it is neces-sary to approach CVRFs from a multidisciplinaryCorrespondence to: A Ferna' ndez-Nebro, UGC de Reumatologi'a,Instituto de Investigacio' n Biome' dica de Ma' laga (IBIMA), HospitalRegional Universitario de Ma' laga, Universidad de Ma' laga, Ma' laga,Spain.Email: 26 July 2016; accepted 14 March 2017! The Author(s), 2017. Reprints and permissions: perspective in SLE; an approach that can both inhi-bit the inflammation cascade and reduce cardiovas-cular risk.9
The aim of this study was to (1) to reviewthe effectiveness of interventions for primary andsecondary preventions of cardiovascular eventsand mortality and (2) to review the effectivenessof interventions for CVRF reduction in SLEpatients.MethodsA systematic review of studies that could answerthe research questions was undertaken.Identification and selection of studies
A comprehensive literature search was conductedon Medline and Embase from 1961 to December2015, restricting the search to articles in English,French and Spanish in humans. The search strategyincluded MeSH terms and free text of synonymousand related terms of 'lupus,' 'cardiovascular risk'and its treatment (see Supplementary Table 1).The search strategies were supervised by an expertlibrarian and two authors who independentlyreviewed the titles and abstracts of articles andapplied the selection criteria.By types of studies, meta-analysis, systematicreviews, randomized controlled trials, phase II,III and IV, non-randomized and uncontrolled clin-ical trials, and observational studies (cross-sec-tional, cohort and case-control) were eligible. Bytypes of participants, studies were eligible if theyincluded adult patients with SLE or patients withsecondary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) toSLE. By types of interventions, the selection wasof studies evaluating the effectiveness of interven-tions for health promotion (i.e. healthy diet, redu-cingobesityandthoseoverweight,smokingcessation and increased physical activity), treat-ment of classic CVRFs (hyperlipidaemia, hyperten-sion, diabetes, treatments that improve vascularendothelial function or flow, antiplatelets and anti-coagulants) or treatment of CVRFs directly relatedtoSLE(antimalarials,glucocorticoids,immunosuppressants).The main outcome measures studied were fataland nonfatal cardiovascular events, i.e. myocardialinfarction (MI), unstable angina, coronary bypassor percutaneous coronary angioplasty, stroke andperipheral artery disease. As secondary endpoints,mortality and changes in major CVRF factors,such as systolic/diastolic blood pressure (SBP/DBP), body mass index (BMI), waist circumfer-ence, coronary calcium, glucose levels, insulinresistance (HOMA-IR), low-density lipoprotein(LDL)cholesterol,high-densitylipoprotein(HDL) cholesterol, flow-mediated dilation (FMD)and smoking cessation were included.
Data extraction and bias assessmentThe articles whose titles or abstracts matched theinclusion criteria were read in full. Failure of asingle eligibility criterion was enough to exclude astudy (see Supplementary Table 2). Any disagree-ments were resolved by consensus between the tworeviewers and with the help of a third reviewer.Two reviewers extracted data from papers inde-pendently in report form.The quality of evidence was analyzed by a crit-ical reading of the selected full-text articles follow-ing the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network(SIGN)guidelines.Theinformationcollectedincludedpopulation,descriptionofthestudydesign, comparison group, outcome measures andresults.ResultsThe search produced a total of 1111 records, ofwhich only 19 studies met the selection criteriaestablished and constituted this systematic review(see Figure 1), covering the publication periodfrom 1984 to 2015. The studies included were: onecross-sectional study, three cohort studies, threecase-control studies, four non-randomized clinicaltrials, five randomized clinical trials (RCT), onesystematic review of the literature and two meta-analyses (see Table 1). Most of the studies wererandomized clinical trials with a level of scientificevidence and grade of recommendation SIGN 1thB. Excluded studies and reasons for exclusion arementioned in Supplementary Table 2.ThetotalnumberofpatientswithSLEincludedinthisreviewwas10,236.Averyimportant variability in sample size of the studieswasobserved,rangingfromeightto4095patients. The duration of the follow-up in longi-tudinal studies ranged from six weeks to 16 years.The most common interventions were antiplate-lets and lipid-lowering drugs, and the outcomemeasure most frequently reported was the occur-rence of thromboembolic events. The characteris-tics of the included studies are shown in theevidence table (Table 1).
Interventions for health promotionInterventions aimed at promoting health weremainly diet, exercise and smoking cessation.Diet. The effect of diet in patients with SLE wasstudied in two RCTs. In the study by Davieset al.,10 23 women with SLE and BMI > 25 kg/m2treated with prednisone followed a low-glycaemicdiet (n  1/4 11) or a low-calorie index diet (n  1/4 12) forsix weeks. Both diets produced an effective, equiva-lent and statistically significant reduction of weight(decrease of the initial weight of 3.9  0.9 kg and2.4  2.2 kg with low glycaemic index and low cal-oricindex,respectively,p < 0.01).Bothdietsimproved waist and hip circumferences. Wrightet al.11 determined the effectiveness of omega-3-polyunsaturated fatty acid supplements on endo-thelial function in SLE patients without CVRFsand not treated with glucocorticoids. Primary out-come was the endothelial function measured byFMD at the brachial artery as of baseline and at12 and 24 weeks. There was a statistically signifi-cantly increase in FMD in the intervention group(FMD 3%, 5.7% and 8.9% at baseline, 12 and24 weeks, respectively, p  1/4 0.001), but not in theplacebo group. Low-calorie diets, low-glycaemic
index diets and supplements of polyunsaturatedomega-3 fatty acids are interventions with a levelof evidence and grade of recommendation of SIGN1 th B.Exercise. Reis-Neto et al. analyzed the effective-ness of a 16-week exercise programme in patientswith SLE (n  1/4 38) without CVRFs on endothelialfunction measured by brachial artery FMD.12 Theexercise group showed an increase in the primaryendpoint from 6.3 to 14.1% (p  1/4 0.006), while nostatistically significant changes were observed in thecontrol group (p  1/4 0.598). Although it seems thatphysical exercise could improve FMD in SLEpatients without CVRFs, as results were obtainedfrom an observational study, they might not be freeof bias and should be taken as a recommendationin clinical practice cautiously (level of scientific evi-dence 1).Smoking cessation. The primary objective of thecohort study by O'Neill et al.13 on smoking cessa-tion was to analyze whether stratification tablesused in the general population were useful to cal-culate cardiovascular risk in patients with SLE. Thestudy included 308 patients with SLE, and the riskof cardiovascular events was calculated using theFramingham-Wilson tables and the SystematicMedline (n=857)Embase (n=254) n=1,111 recordsRecords excluded aertle reading (n=816)Records excluded aerabstract reading (n=262)Full-text arcles excluded(n=22)(Suppl. Table 2)Records screened(n=295) Records Full-Text (n=33) Studies included(n=11) Total included(n=19) Hand search (n=8) LupusDos Reis-Neto et al.12Non-randomized clin-ical trial16 weeks38 patients withSLE18 patients performedaerobic exercise pro-grammes (10 minuteswarm-up, 40 minuteswalking and 10 minutesstretching)20 patients whodid not doexerciseAfter 16 weeks, FMDincreased in the exercisegroup but showed nochange in the controlgroup. FMD increasedfrom a baseline of 6.3% to14.1% at 16 weeks in theexercise group (p  1/4 0.006),with only a slight increasefrom 8.4% to 9.4% in thecontrol group (p  1/4 0.598).
Exercise improvesendothelial functionin patients withSLE.Tarr et al.21Prospective cohortstudyfive years272 patients withSLETreatment with antiplate-let (ASA and clopido-grel) andanticoagulants(coumarinic)Control groupDuring follow-up, threepatients with aPLth had astroke (one patient wasreceiving antiplatelet ther-apy and two wereuntreated). In the APSgroup, there were twopatients with MI (bothpatients received anti-coagulant treatment) andfive patients with stroke(four patients with acetylsalicylic acid th anticoagu-lant; one patient with acetylsalicylic acid).Oral anticoagulantsand antiplateletagents reduce theincidence of arterialevents in patientswith SLE (withaPLth and APS)Arnaud et al.18Meta-analysis192 patients withSLE and CVRFs109 patients were treatedwith low doses of anti-platelet (ASA)83 patients withSLE withoutASA treatment(30%)Lower incidence of arterialthrombotic events inpatients treated with ASAcompared with patientswithout this treatment (OR0.43, 95% CI 0.20-0.94).
Davies et al.10RCT, opensix weeks23 patients withSLE11 patients conducted alow-glycaemic diet12 patients con-ducted a low-caloric dietThere was significant weightloss in both groups(mean  SD: low glycaemicindex diet 3.9  0.9 kg; cal-orie restricted diet2.4  2.2 kg, p < 0.01 frombaseline in each group).The difference in weightloss between the groupswas, however, not signifi-cant. There were significantreductions in waist and hipgirth measurements in eachgroup.Diets of low caloricand/or low gly-caemic index posi-tively contribute inimproving CVRFsin patients withSLELupusReferenceDesign and durationPopulationExposure/interventionComparisonResultsAuthors' conclusionsQuality ofevidenceArnaud et al.19Meta-analysis440 patients withSLE and CVRFs261 patients with treat-ment with antiplatelet(low doses of ASA)179 patients withSLE withoutASA treatmentArterial thrombotic eventsare analyzed in a subgroupof patients with SLE andAPS. ASA produced aprotective effect of arterialthrombotic events (OR0.55, 95% CI: 0.31-0.98).Lower risk of throm-botic events (pri-mary prevention) inSLE patients trea-ted with low-doseASAEL 1ththRG BCuadrado et al.20RCT, openfive years232 patients withSLE166 patients with antipla-telet (ASA) and anti-coagulant (warfarin)treatment66 patients withSLE withoutASA treatmentThere is a double incidence ofthrombotic events (stroke,MI) in patients withouttreatment compared withpatients with ASA (4.9events/100 person-years atrisk vs 1.8 events/100person-years at risk,respectively)Primary prophylaxiswith ASA reducesthe risk of throm-botic events inpatients with SLEEL 1-RGnot usefulYu et al.14Case-control study.12 years4095 patients withSLE andhyperlipidaemia
Lipid-lowering therapy(statins or other lipid-lowering drugs)Cohort adjust-ment for sex,age and comor-bidities (hyper-tension, dia-betes, chronickidney disease)untreatedLower mortality and numberof cardiovascular events inpatients with high doses ofstatins compared withuntreated patients.Statins reduce mortal-ity and morbidity,including MI andstroke, in patientswith SLEEL 2thGRCFerreira et al.15Non-randomized clin-ical trial, openeight weeks88 patients withSLE64 patients with lipid-lowering therapy (ator-vastatin). Thirty-onepatients withoutCVRFs and 33 withCVRFs (hypertension,dyslipidaemia andobesity)24 patients withSLE untreated.FMD increased in patientstreated with atorvastatin(3.8% and 6.9% baselineand eight weeks, p < 0.001).No significant changes ofFMD in controls (4.7baseline vs 4.1, p  1/4 0.426).Secondary outcomes: HDLcholesterol levels were sig-nificantly lower(47  12 mg/dL vs41  8 mg/dL, p  1/4 0.049)and mean DBP was sig-nificantly higher (74(70-80) mmHg vs 80(78-83) mmHg, p  1/4 0.01) inthe control group com-pared to the interventiongroup.Endothelial function(vasodilatation)improved withatorvastatin treat-ment, independentof the presence ofconventional riskfactors for athero-sclerotic disease.Additionally, theintervention groupshowed higherlevels of HDLcompared with thecontrol group(p  1/4 0.049) andlower values ofDBP comparedwith the controlgroup (p  1/4 0.01).EL 1-RGnot usefulRuiz-Irastorza et al.24SR1982-2007Eight studies (2129patients with SLEand CVRFs)Treatment with HCQControl groupMost studies found thattreatment with HCQreduces thrombotic events(OR <1, CI 95%)HCQ has a protectiveeffect on throm-botic events inpatients with SLE(continued)LupusReferenceDesign and durationPopulationExposure/interventionComparisonResultsAuthors' conclusionsQuality ofevidence
Kaiser et al.25Nested case-control1534 patients withSLE and CVRFsand/or previouscardiovasculareventsTreatment with HCQPatients with SLEuntreatedTreatment with HCQ is aprotective factor of throm-bosis, with an OR of 0.62and a p value of4.9  (104)HCQ is a protectivefactor of throm-bosis in patientswith CVRF and/orprevious cardiovas-cular eventsEL 2thRG CPetri et al.16RCT, double blindtwo years200 patients withSLE withoutCVRFsLipid-lowering therapy(atorvastatin)Patients with SLEand placeboHelical CT scan and Dopplerultrasound of the carotidarteries to determine thecoronary and carotid cal-cium. At baseline, 43% ofpatients had coronaryartery calcium. At twoyears, there was no signifi-cant difference between thegroups in the progressionof coronary artery calcium,carotid intima mediathickness or carotid plaque.There was no significantdifference between thegroups in disease activity,measures of inflammationor endothelial cellactivation.There is no evidencethat atorvastatinreducesatherosclerosisEL 1thRG BJung et al.26Case-control withlogistic regressiontwo years162 patients withSLE and throm-botic events54 were treated with HCQ108 patients withSLE withoutthromboticeventsThe use of antimalarial drugswas associated with a lowerrisk of thrombotic events,with an OR  1/4 0.31, 95%CI. Separate analyses weredone for arterial andvenous thrombotic events,which yielded similarresults.Antimalarial drugsprotect againstthrombus forma-tion and produce a68% reduction ofthrombotic events.EL 2thRG CPlazak et al.17RCT, double blindone year60 patients withSLE28 patients treated withlipid-lowering agents(atorvastatin)CT scans were performed todetermine the level of cor-onary calcium one yearafter treatment. Coronarycalcium deposits signifi-cantly increased in the pla-cebo group, with nosignificant changes in theatorvastatin group.Secondary outcomes: lowerlow-density lipoprotein,triglycerides and overallcholesterol levels inpatients with intervention(21%, 25%, and 13%,
No progression ofatherosclerosismeasured by coron-ary CT scan inpatients with SLEtreated daily withatorvastatin for ayear.EL 1thRG B(continued)LupusReferenceDesign and durationPopulationExposure/interventionComparisonResultsAuthors' conclusionsQuality ofevidencerespectively) in the ator-vastatin group.Wright et al.11RCT double blind andparallel groups24 weeks60 patients withSLE30 SLE patients receiveddiet with supplementsof polyunsaturatedomega-3 fatty acidsDilation of the brachial artery(FMD) was measured inthe group that received adiet with supplements ofpolyunsaturated omega-3fatty acids and in the pla-cebo group at baseline andat 12 and 24 weeks. FMDwas significantly increasedfrom baseline at week 12and week 24 in the inter-vention group, median(range), baseline FMD3.0% (20.5 to 8.2) vs week12 FMD 5.7% (21.0 to10.8), p  1/4 0.002 and vsweek 24 FMD 8.9% (1.3 to16.9), p  1/4 0.001. There wasno significant change inFMD at 12 or 24 weeks inthe placebo group.
Supplementing thediet with omega 3fatty acids improvesendothelial functionin patients withSLEEL 1thRG BRuiz- Irastorza et al.27Cohort232 patients withSLETreatment with antimal-arial drugsSLE patients whohave nevertakenantimalarialsProtective effect of treatmentwith antimalarial drugs inSLE patients against thedevelopment of thrombosis(HR 0.82%, CI 0.08-0.09)The results of thestudy support thecontinued use ofantimalarial drugsin the treatment ofSLE withoutcontraindicationsEL 2thRG CPenn et al.28Cross-sectional study16 years149 patients withSLE non-diabetic71 patients treated withHCQ78 patients withSLE non-dia-betic untreatedwith HCQPatients treated with HCQshowed lower levels offasting glucose (87.1 mg/dLvs 91.5 mg/dL in controlgroup), p  1/4 0.009, insulinresistance [assessed by thehomeostasis model assess-ment (HOMA-IR) calcula-tion of 2.51 (1.73, 3.55) 194in the treatment group vs2.87 (1.97, 4.28) 179 in thecontrol group withouttreatment), p  1/4 0.046, andLDL levels (102  32 mg/dL) in the treatment groupvs (118  34 mg/dL) in thecontrol group), p  1/4 0.004.HCQ seems to have abeneficial effect oncardiovascular riskin SLEO'Neill et al.13Cohortthree years308 patients withSLE and CVRFsStrategies for smokingcessationAlmost half of smokingpatients in the studyStrategies for smokingcessation areEL 2thRG C(continued)LupusReferenceDesign and durationPopulationExposure/interventionComparisonResultsAuthors' conclusionsQuality ofevidencestopped smoking with theanti-smoking strategy(47%)effective for redu-cing or stoppingsmoking in SLEpatients.Bursztyn et al.22Non-randomized clin-ical trialsix monthsEight patients withSLENifedipine treatmentEight patientswith SLE aftertreatment withnifedipine
Reduction in BPfrom 151.9  10/103.7  8.6 mmHg to130  14.1/87.5  5 mmHgafter six months treatmentwith nifedipine.Nifedipine may reduceblood pressure inSLE patients.EL 1 thRG BHerlitz et al.23Non-randomized clin-ical trial>six months14 patients withSLETreatment with captopril14 patients withSLE after treat-ment withcaptoprilDecrease in BP from 178  7/110  4 to 145  5/92  3 mmHg, after sixmonths treatment withcaptopril.Captopril as a con-comitant treatmentmay contribute toimproving theblood pressure inlupus nephritispatients.EL 1thRG BAbbreviations: ACO: oral anticoagulant; MI: myocardial infarction; aPL: antiphospholipid antibodies; APS: antiphospholipid syndrome; ASA: acetylsalicylic acid; BP: blood pressure;CI: confidence interval; CT: computed tomography; CVRFs: cardiovascular risk factors; DBP: diastolic blood pressure; EL: evidence level; FMD: flow-mediated dilation; GI: glycaemicindex; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine; HDL: high-density lipoprotein; HR: hazard ratio; LDL: low-density lipoprotein; OR: odds ratio; RG: recommendation grade; SLE: systemic lupus erythema-tous; SR: systematic review; TG: triglycerides; SD: standard deviation.LupusCoronary Risk Evaluation (SCORE). A lipid-low-ering therapy and a strategy for reducing smokingwere prescribed in subjects with a SCORE >7.5%.Calculating a baseline risk did not modify subse-quent management in 96.5% of cases, since patientswith cardiovascular risk were already receivingappropriate treatment. A secondary endpoint ofthis study was to estimate the smoking cessationrate in a period of approximately three years:47% of the patients stopped smoking or reducedconsumption after the introduction of a properstrategy. The level of evidence and grade of recom-mendation was SIGN 2th C.Pharmacological interventions
Lipid-lowering therapy. The effect of lipid loweringon cardiovascular risk of patients with SLE hasbeen studied in three clinical trials and one case-control study controlled by the effect of age, sexandcomorbidities(hypertension,diabetesandchronic kidney disease). Yu et al.14 conducted acase-control study of 8.4  3.5 years on a popula-tion of 4095 patients with SLE and hyperlipidaemianested in the Taiwan National Health InsuranceResearch Database. Mortality rate was lower inpatients with high doses of statins (hazard ratio(HR)  1/4 0.44) as well as low doses of statins plushydroxychloroquine(HR  1/4 0.38).Inaddition,high doses of statins significantly reduced the inci-dence of acute myocardial infarction (HR  1/4 0.20,95%confidenceinterval(CI):0.13-0.31)andstroke (HR  1/4 0.14; CI 95%: 0.08-0.25). In the clin-ical trial by Ferreira et al., 20 mg/day of atorvasta-tin produced a beneficial effect in 64 SLE patients,33 of whom had hypertension, dyslipidaemia andobesity and 31 had no CVRFs, who were comparedto a control group without atorvastatin.15 Themain outcome, FMD at eight weeks, increased sig-nificantly from 4% to 7% in the atorvastatin groupand did not increase in the untreated group. Theintervention group showed changes in other sec-ondary outcomes, with significantly higher levelsof HDL cholesterol and lower DBP values thanthe control group (HDL of 47 mg/dL and 41 mg/dLintheinterventionandcontrolgroups;p  1/4 0.049; DBP of 74 mmHg and 80 mmHg in theinterventionandcontrolgroups,respectively).Nevertheless, this was a non-randomized clinicaltrial, and thus with a potential selection bias.Other studies have failed to find any significantchanges in other surrogate markers of atheroscler-osis, such as a two-year RCT conducted by Petriet al.16 in which 200 patients with SLE without pre-vious cardiovascular events were treated with
atorvastatin40 mg/day(n  1/4 99)orplacebo(n  1/4 101). The main outcome was the extent of cor-onary calcium, determined by computed tomog-raphy(CT)scan.Therewerenostatisticallysignificant differences between the groups withrespect to changes in coronary artery calciumscore after two years (atorvastatin, 1.24 vs placebo,1.35; p  1/4 0.62).Secondary outcomes were LDL and triglycerideslevels, showing a reduction in both parametersin the intervention group compared with thecontrol group (LDL cholesterol, 2.9 mg/dL vs2.3 mg/dL; p < 0.05; triglycerides, 1.6 mg/dL vs1.2 mg/dL; p < 0.05).By contrast, in the RCT conducted by Plazaket al.,17 lower coronary calcium deposits measuredby CT scan were observed in 28 SLE patients with-out CVRFs after one year of treatment with 40 mgatorvastatin compared to 32 SLE patients receivingplacebo (intervention group, 54.5 mm at baselineand 51.0 mm after one year of treatment with ator-vastatin, non-significant). With regard to secondaryoutcomes,patientstreatedwithatorvastatinshowed a decrease in LDL cholesterol (21%), tri-glycerides (25%) and total cholesterol (13%) after ayear of treatment. In summary, the data abouteffect of lipid lowering treatment on coronary cal-cium are contradictory and large prospective clin-ical trials are needed. Although there is an effect inimproving the lipid profile, the effect of this treat-ment on overall cardiovascular mortality is yetunknown (level of scientific evidence and grade ofrecommendation SIGN 1th B.)Antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatment. Fourreports (two meta-analyses, one RCT and oneprospective cohort study) studied the effect ofantithrombotic drugs (antiplatelet agents and anti-coagulants) on cardiovascular risk in SLE patients.The main outcome in both meta-analyses18,19 wasthe efficacy of acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) for the pri-mary prevention of thrombotic events in patientswith SLE and CVRFs. The first meta-analysisobtained data from five cohort studies summing497 participants with positive antiphospholipidantibodies,ofwhom192werepatientswithSLE.18 The second meta-analysis included 11 stu-dies (10 cohorts and one RCT), with a total of 440patients with SLE.19 An analysis of the efficacy ofASA was conducted according to the occurrence ofthrombotic events in SLE patients treated with lowdoseASAcomparedtountreatedpatients(excluding patients receiving clopidogrel or oralanticoagulants). Results of both meta-analysesindicated that ASA is effective for the primary pre-vention of thrombosis, with an odds ratio (OR) of
Lupus
0.43 [95% CI: 0.20-0.94] and 0.55 [95% CI: 0.31-0.98], respectively. Cuadrado et al. conducted anopen RCT in 232 SLE patients without previouscardiovascularevents,ofwhom166patientsreceived treatment (82 with ASA and 84 withASA th warfarin) and 66 were untreated.20 The pri-mary outcome was the occurrence of thromboticevents (primary prevention) during five years offollow-up in three groups, as follows: patients trea-ted with ASA alone, ASA plus warfarin, and with-out antithrombotic treatment. No differences werefound in the rate of thrombotic events betweenpatients with ASA or with ASA plus warfarin;however, the rate of thrombotic events in theuntreated group was twice the rate in the interven-tion group (4.9 events/100 person-years versus 1.8events/100 person-years, respectively [HR  1/4 2.43,95% CI: 0.87-6.79)]. As it is an open trial, the like-lihood of bias is large and the quality of the evi-dence limited. The cohort study conducted by Tarret al. analyzed the effectiveness of primary and sec-ondary prevention of antithrombotic therapy inpatients with SLE (n  1/4 272).21 MI and stroke werethe main outcomes. Three different groups wereanalyzed: patients with SLE and positive antipho-spholipid antibody (n  1/4 81), patients with SLE andAPS (n  1/4 84), and patients with SLE and negativeantiphospholipid antibody (n  1/4 107). Fifty-two ofthe 81 patients in the group with positive antipho-spholipid antibodies received primary prophylaxis,of whom 50 were treated with ASA, one with cou-marin and one with clopidogrel; 79 of 84 patients inthe group with APS received prophylaxis with anti-coagulants and/or antiplatelets: 37 ASA, 23 couma-rin, two clopidogrel, and 17 ASA plus coumarin.After five years, a patient with positive antipho-spholipid antibodies treated with ASA had astroke and two patients with positive antibodywithout prophylaxis had strokes. In the groupwith SLE and APS, there were two MI and fivestrokes (one with ASA and four with ASA th cou-marin). In summary, the use of antiplatelet agentsand/or anticoagulants appears to be useful in theprimary prevention of thrombotic events in patientswith SLE, with a level of scientific evidence andgrade of recommendation SIGN 1thth B. It alsoappears that the secondary prevention of throm-botic events (MI and stroke) may be beneficial inthese patients (level of evidence and grade of rec-ommendation SIGN 2thC).Antihypertensive. Two small, non-randomized,uncontrolledopenclinicaltrialsanalyzedtheeffect of antihypertensive treatment in patientswith SLE. In the case series of Bursztyn et al.,eight SLE patients received 40 mg/day nifedipine,
andbloodpressure(BP)wasreducedfrom151.9  10/103.7  8.6 mmHgto130  14.1/87.5  5 mmHg in six months.22 In the study byHerlitz et al., 14 patients received captopril andreducedBPfrom178  7/110  4to145  5/92  3 mmHg.23 In conclusion, it appears that treat-mentwithantihypertensivedrugseffectivelyreduces BP in patients with SLE, although the stu-dies analyzed did not include a control group, andso the level of evidence and grade of recommenda-tion were SIGN 3 D.Specific treatment of SLEAntimalarials. Five studies have analyzed the effect-iveness of antimalarials on cardiovascular risk inSLE: one meta-analysis, one cohort study, twocase-control studies and one cross-sectional study.Ruiz-Irastorza et al.24 demonstrated the effect ofhydroxychloroquine in the primary prevention ofthromboticeventsinpatientswithSLEandCVRFs in a meta-analysis. Individual studies alsoshowed a lower risk of thrombotic events with anti-malarials.25-27 Penn at al. reviewed the clinical rec-ords of 149 non-diabetic patients with SLE, half ofwhomhadbeentreatedwithantimalarials.28Endpoints were glucose levels (mg/dL), insulinresistance (HOMA-IR) and LDL over an averageperiod of 16 years. The group exposed to antimal-arials showed lower glucose fasting levels (87.1 mg/dLversus91.5 mg/dL)andinsulinresistance(HOMA-IR  1/4 194 versus 179) than the controlgroup. Similarly, LDL levels were lower comparedto the untreated group (LDL of 102 mg/dL and118 mg/dL in the groups with and without treat-ment, respectively). In summary, it appears thatthe use of hydroxychloroquine in patients withSLE and CVRFs is useful for the primary preven-tion of thrombotic events, with a level of scientificevidence and grade of recommendation SIGN 1thB. Also, the use of hydroxychloroquine seems tohave a positive effect on glucose levels, insulinresistance and LDL levels, with a level of scientificevidence 1, but it is not possible to establish thedegree of recommendation SIGN.
DiscussionAlthough SLE is associated with a higher risk ofcardiovascular complications, studies that haveexamined the efficacy of interventions on CVRFsin SLE patients are scarce.SLE patients exhibit obesity in a large propor-tion.5 Consequently, it is necessary to prevent andLupus
treat weight gain in these patients. One of the stu-dies of this review analyzed the effect of diets withlow-calorie and/or low glycaemic index on weightin overweight patients with SLE, showing that bothdiets are a useful measure in secondary preventionof obesity in these patients (SIGN 1th B).10 To pre-vent the development of a factor as important asobesity in cardiovascular risk, new studies inpatients who have not yet gained excess weight (pri-mary prevention) are needed. We have also found abeneficialeffectofdietwithpolyunsaturatedomega-3 fatty acids on the FMD in SLE patientswithout CVRFs, but new studies on the effects onpatients with SLE and CVRFs or previous cardio-vascular events are warranted.Studies examining the effect of exercise in SLEare scarce and the only ones found suggest thatexerciseimprovesFMDinpatientswithoutCVRFs. Consequently, it appears that exercisewould be useful in improving vasodilatation inthis group of patients; however, the study that ana-lyzes this effect lacks external validity and it is notpossible to extrapolate the results to clinical prac-tice. It would also be necessary to examine whetherexercise can improve FMD in patients with SLEand CVRFs.Smoking seems less frequent in patients withSLE,13 although the RELESSER study has foundan increased risk of cardiovascular events in activesmokers and ex-smokers (37%; OR  1/4 1.48, 95%CI: 1.06-2.07).8 Very few studies focussed on theeffect of smoking cessation in CVRFs in patientswith SLE. One such study suggests that smokingcessation strategies (counselling) can help reduceconsumption, but it does not analyze the impactof this measure on cardiovascular endpoints (levelof scientific evidence and grade of recommendationSIGN 2th C).The frequency of diabetes is also high in SLEpatients.5 Lupus patients with diabetes exhibitedan increased risk of cardiovascular events in theRELESSER study (OR  1/4 2.22, CI 95%: 1.32-3.74).8 However, only one study, of a cross-sec-tional nature, has studied the association betweenblood glucose levels or insulin resistance withhydroxychloroquine,28 and thus the strength of arecommendation is limited.The use of lipid-lowering drugs is widespread inthe general population because of the many benefitsof primary and secondary prevention of cardiovas-cular events. It seems that the effect is identical inpatients with SLE. Yu et al.14 reported that the useof high doses of statins decreased mortality andcardiovascular events in patients with SLE andhyperlipidaemiawithoutpreviousevents.
Unfortunately, the level of evidence is insufficient,as this was a case-control study, making it neces-sary to undertake studies of higher quality.In addition, RCTs16,17 showed the efficacy ofatorvastatin to reduce total cholesterol, LDL andtriglycerides levels in SLE patients without previousCVRFs. Although the outcomes analyzed are sec-ondary, the level of evidence and the grade of rec-ommendation SIGN of these clinical trials (level ofevidence 1th, grade of recommendation B) suggestthat SLE patients without CVRFs should be trea-ted with atorvastatin; nevertheless, new studies areneeded focussed on other outcomes such as theoccurrence of major cardiovascular events (MI,stroke). Both RCTs examined surrogate endpointsof atherosclerosis with mixed results.A non-randomized clinical trial examined theeffect of atorvastatin on FMD, HDL cholesterollevels and DBP values in SLE patients withoutCVRFs.15 Despite the improvement of these threeparameters, it is not possible to draw firm conclu-sions given the evidence level of the study.SLE patients have a higher risk of ischemic heartdisease, stroke and other thrombotic events.5 Allstudies have indicated that the use of antiplatelettherapy (ASA and/or clopidogrel) may be usefulfor primary prevention of thrombotic events inpatients with SLE. The use of ASA appears effect-ive in primary prevention of thrombotic events inpatients with SLE and CVRFs with high level ofevidence. The only study that analyzed the effect ofantiplatelet agents and/or anticoagulants as sec-ondary prevention of thrombotic events was anobservational cohort study,21 so new studies withhigher levels of evidence may be needed.RegardingspecifictreatmentofSLE, mostreports analyzed the effect of antimalarial drugs(hydroxychloroquine) on cardiovascular risk inSLE, noting that this drug may be useful in theprimary prevention of thrombotic events in patientswith SLE and CVRFs, with a level of scientific evi-dence and grade of recommendation SIGN 1th B.The presence of thrombosis was analyzed inpatients with SLE, CVRFs and prior treatmentwith hydroxychloroquine in a nested case-control.The risk of thrombotic events was lower in patientstreated with hydroxychloroquine, and this drugalso appears to be useful for the secondary preven-tion of thrombotic events; however, it was anobservational case-control study and studies withhigher levels of evidence are needed to verifythese findings.Hypertension is also a frequent CVRF in lupuspatients.5 The two studies found in this search werenot controlled clinical trials;22,23 therefore, it is
Lupus
necessary to conduct clinical trials including a con-trolgrouptoestablishstrongerinferences.Although the small sample size of the studiesreduces the usefulness of the results, and theyshould not have been included in a review, wefinally decided to include them because there areno other studies on this outcome and we did notsettle any exclusion criterion based on sample size.No studies have been found on the potentialeffect of glucocorticoids and immunosuppressantson CVRFs, although it is well known that gluco-corticoids increase cardiovascular risk in the gen-eral population.The implications of this review for clinical prac-tice are based primarily on the usefulness of dietarymeasures with low-caloric and/or low glycaemicindex diets in patients with SLE who are over-weight. It would also be advisable to use dietswith polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids, as theyimprove the FMD. The effects of physical activityon CVRFs in patients with SLE have been inaccur-ate and further studies are needed. It is recom-mended that cessation of smoking is advised forthese patients. Further studies analyzing the effectof smoking cessation on CVRFs in patients withSLE are also needed. It is essential to conduct add-itional studies to examine the intervention on bloodglucose levels in order to reduce diabetes in thesepatients, since existing studies are scarce and do notenable a causal relationship to be determined.Existing evidence indicates that the use of statinmay reduce overall mortality in patients with SLEand hyperlipidaemia, but more studies are neces-sary. However, the use of atorvastatin in SLEpatients without CVRFs should be appropriate asthis drug increases FMD independently of its chol-esterol lowering action. However, studies analysingmore specific outcomes, such as the occurrence ofcardiovascular events, should be carried out.The use of ASA and hydroxychloroquine is rec-ommended in patients with SLE and CVRFs inorder to prevent the occurrence of first thromboticevents. There are many studies exploring the use ofantiplatelet therapies and/or anticoagulants in thegeneral population, but specific studies about theseeffects are required in patients with SLE.25 The useof antihypertensive drugs in patients with SLE andHTA is advised;22,23 however, given the absence ofa control group in the trials found in this review, itis important to conduct new studies involvinguntreated patients.In conclusion, the results of this review suggestthat interventions aiming at controlling CVRFsmaybeeffectiveinpatientswithSLE.Rheumatologistsshouldbeawareofthe
importance of cardiovascular risk assessment andproceed accordingly. We suggest some recommen-dations to be implemented in clinical practice.Declaration of conflicting interestsThe authors declared no potential conflicts of inter-est with respect to the research, authorship, and/orpublication of this article.FundingThe authors received no financial support for theresearch, authorship, and/or publication of thisarticle.References
1 Carmona L, Ballina J, Gabriel R, Laffon A. The burdenof musculoskeletal diseases in the general population of Spain:results from a national survey. Ann Rheum Dis 2001; 60:1040-1045.2 Lim SS, Drenkard C. Epidemiology of lupus: an update. Curr OpinRheumatol 2015; 27: 427-432.3 Espinosa G, Bucciarelli S, Asherson RA, Cervera R. Morbidityand mortality in the catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome:pathophysiology, causes of death, and prognostic factors. SeminThromb Hemostasis 2008; 34: 290-294.4 Moroni G, Quaglini S, Gallelli B, Banfi G, Messa P, Ponticelli C.Progressive improvement of patient and renal survival and reduc-tion of morbidity over time in patients with lupus nephritis (LN)followed for 20 years. Lupus 2013; 22: 810-818.5 Petri M, Perez-Gutthann S, Spence D, Hochberg MC. Risk factorsfor coronary artery disease in patients with systemic lupus erythe-matosus. Am J Med 1992; 93: 513-519.6 van Leuven SI, Franssen R, Kastelein JJ, Levi M, Stroes ES, TakPP. Systemic inflammation as a risk factor for atherothrombosis.Rheumatology (Oxford) 2008; 47: 3-7.7 Salmon JE, Roman MJ. Accelerated atherosclerosis in systemiclupus erythematosus: implications for patient management. CurrOpin Rheumatol 2001; 13: 341-344.8 Fernandez-Nebro A, Rua-Figueroa I, Lopez-Longo FJ, Galindo-IzquierdoM,Calvo-AlenJ,Olive-MarquesA,etal.Cardiovascular events in systemic lupus erythematosus: a nation-wide study in Spain from the RELESSER Registry. Medicine(Baltimore) 2015; 94: e1183.9 Lindhardsen J, Kristensen SL, Ahlehoff O. Management of car-diovascular risk in patients with chronic inflammatory diseases:current evidence and future perspectives. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs2016; 16: 1-8.10 Davies RJ, Lomer MC, Yeo SI, Avloniti K, Sangle SR, D'CruzDP. Weight loss and improvements in fatigue in systemic lupuserythematosus: a controlled trial of a low glycaemic index dietversus a calorie restricted diet in patients treated with corticoster-oids. Lupus 2012; 21: 649-655.11 Wright SA, O'Prey FM, McHenry MT, Leahey WJ, Devine AB,Duffy EM, et al. A randomised interventional trial of omega-3-polyunsaturated fatty acids on endothelial function and diseaseactivity in systemic lupus erythematosus. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67: 841-848.12 dos Reis-Neto ET, da Silva AE, Monteiro CM, de Camargo LM,Sato EI. Supervised physical exercise improves endothelial function
Lupusin patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheumatology(Oxford) 2013; 52: 2187-2195.13 O'Neill SG, Pego-Reigosa JM, Hingorani AD, Bessant R, IsenbergDA, Rahman A. Use of a strategy based on calculated risk scoresin managing cardiovascular risk factors in a large British cohort ofpatientswithsystemiclupuserythematosus.Rheumatology(Oxford) 2009; 48: 573-575.14 Yu HH, Chen PC, Yang YH, Wang LC, Lee JH, Lin YT, et al.Statin reduces mortality and morbidity in systemic lupus erythe-matosus patients with hyperlipidemia: A nationwide population-based cohort study. Atherosclerosis 2015; 243: 11-18.15 Ferreira GA, Navarro TP, Telles RW, Andrade LE, Sato EI.Atorvastatin therapy improves endothelial-dependent vasodilationin patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: an 8 weeks con-trolled trial. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2007; 46: 1560-1565.16 Petri MA, Kiani AN, Post W, Christopher-Stine L, Magder LS.Lupus Atherosclerosis Prevention Study (LAPS). Ann Rheum Dis2011; 70: 760-765.17 PlazakW,GrygaK,DziedzicH,Tomkiewicz-PajakL,Konieczynska M, Podolec P, et al. Influence of atorvastatin oncoronary calcifications and myocardial perfusion defects in sys-temic lupus erythematosus patients: a prospective, randomized,double-masked,placebo-controlledstudy.ArthritisResTher2011; 13: R117.18 Arnaud L, Mathian A, Devilliers H, Ruffatti A, Tektonidou M,Forastiero R, et al. Patient-level analysis of five internationalcohorts further confirms the efficacy of aspirin for the primaryprevention of thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid anti-bodies. Autoimmun Rev 2015; 14: 192-200.19 Arnaud L, Mathian A, Ruffatti A, Erkan D, Tektonidou M,Cervera R, et al. Efficacy of aspirin for the primary preventionof thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid antibodies: aninternational and collaborative meta-analysis. Autoimmun Rev2014; 13: 281-291.
20 Cuadrado MJ, Bertolaccini ML, Seed PT, Tektonidou MG,Aguirre A, Mico L, et al. Low-dose aspirin vs low-dose aspirinplus low-intensity warfarin in thromboprophylaxis: a prospective,multicentre, randomized, open, controlled trial in patients positivefor antiphospholipid antibodies (ALIWAPAS). Rheumatology(Oxford) 2014; 53: 275-284.21 Tarr T, Lakos G, Bhattoa HP, Soltesz P, Shoenfeld Y, Szegedi G,et al. Clinical thrombotic manifestations in SLE patients with andwithout antiphospholipid antibodies: a 5-year follow-up. Clin RevAllergy Immunol 2007; 32: 131-137.22 Bursztyn M, Many A, Rosenthal T. Nifedipine in the treatment ofhypertension in systemic lupus erythematosus. Angiology 1987; 38:359-362.23 Herlitz H, Edeno C, Mulec H, Westberg G, Aurell M. Captopriltreatment of hypertension and renal failure in systemic lupus ery-thematosus. Nephron 1984; 38: 253-256.24 Ruiz-Irastorza G, Ramos-Casals M, Brito-Zeron P, KhamashtaMA. Clinical efficacy and side effects of antimalarials in systemiclupus erythematosus: a systematic review. Ann Rheum Dis 2010; 69:20-28.25 Kaiser R, Cleveland CM, Criswell LA. Risk and protective factorsfor thrombosis in systemic lupus erythematosus: results from alarge, multi-ethnic cohort. Ann Rheum Dis 2009; 68: 238-241.26 Jung H, Bobba R, Su J, Shariati-Sarabi Z, Gladman DD, UrowitzM, et al. The protective effect of antimalarial drugs on thrombo-vascular events in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum2010; 62: 863-868.27 Ruiz-Irastorza G, Egurbide MV, Pijoan JI, Garmendia M, Villar I,Martinez-Berriotxoa A, et al. Effect of antimalarials on thrombosisand survival in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus2006; 15: 577-583.28 Penn SK, Kao AH, Schott LL, Elliott JR, Toledo FG, Kuller L,et al. Hydroxychloroquine and glycemia in women with rheuma-toid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. J Rheumatol 2010;37: 1136-1142.Lupus
