doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2007.01878.xEfficacy and safety of anticoagulant prophylaxis to preventvenous thromboembolism in acutely ill medical inpatients:a meta-analysisA. Sja"lander1, J.-H. Jansson2, D. Bergqvist3, H. Eriksson4, B. Carlberg5 & P. Svensson6From the 1Department of Internal Medicine, Sundsvall Hospital, Sundsvall; 2Department of Internal Medicine, SkellefteaHospital, 3Department of Vascular Surgery, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala; 4Department of InternalMedicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, O"stra, Go"teborg; 5Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, UmeaUniversity Hospital, and 6Department of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, Malmo" University Hospital, Malmo"; SwedenAbstract. Sja"lander A, Jansson J-H, Bergqvist D, Eri-ksson H, Carlberg B, Svensson P (Sundsvall Hospital,Sundsvall; UppsalaUniversity Hospital, Uppsala; Sahlgrenska UniversityHospital, O" stra, Go"teborg; University and Malmo" University Hospital, Malmo"; Swe-den). Efficacy and safety of anticoagulant prophylaxisto prevent venous thromboembolism in acutely illmedical inpatients:a meta-analysis. J Intern Med2008; 263: 52-60.
Objectives.Venousthromboembolism(VTE)isapotentiallyseriouscomplicationofhospitalizationand immobilization. The use of anticoagulant pro-phylaxis in acutely ill medical inpatients is stillunder debate. New data including a recent meta-anal-ysis have recently been published. We aim at study-ingtheefficacyandsafetyofanticoagulantprophylaxis in acutely ill medical inpatients, anddemonstrate differences between meta-analyses dueto different data extraction from the heterogeneousstudies included.Subjects. The Cochrane Library, MEDLINE and EM-BASE were searched from 1980 to present. Manualsearches were performed regarding abstracts frommajor meetings. Seven blinded randomized controlledclinical trials assessing the prophylactic effect ofheparin in acutely ill medical patients were identifiedand included in the meta-analysis.Results. Low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) pro-phylaxis prevented 48% of symptomatic pulmonaryembolism (PE), 48% of symptomatic deep vein throm-bosis (DVT) (not significant) and 51% of asympto-matic DVT. A nonsignificant trend towards higherbleeding risk during LMWH prophylaxis was found.Death was not significantly affected. We compared ourdata with a recent meta-analysis with different studyselection and data extraction and found similar results.Conclusions. As DVT and PE are manifestations of thesame illness, VTE, one can argue that anticoagulantprophylaxispreventsapproximatelyhalfoftheexpected events. Most medical inpatients have shorthospital stays, and a low risk of VTE. The importanttask for the clinician is to identify patients with a suf-ficiently high risk of symptomatic VTE to warrantLMWH prophylaxis. Despite differences in studyselection and data extraction, our study shows resultssimilar to a recent meta-analysis.Keywords:heparin, low-molecular weight heparin,prevention, pulmonary embolism, venous thromboem-bolism, venous thrombosis.Original Article |Introduction
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is not an uncommoncomplication of hospitalization and immobilization.The rationale for thromboprophylaxis in orthopaedicand general surgery patients is well documented [1,2]. The risk period is relatively well defined, and theincidence of symptomatic VTE is high prompting theclinician to use VTE prophylaxis. In acutely ill medi-cal patients, VTE prophylaxis is not widely useddespiteconsensusstatementsrecommendingsuchpatients to be assessed for risk of VTE on admissionto the hospital and receive thromboprophylaxis whereappropriate[2,3].Thereluctancetoimplementthromboprophylaxis in acutely ill medical patientsmay reflect the difficulty to select high risk patients[4], and lack of data showing that symptomatic VTEcan be prevented. A previous meta-analysis [5] con-sists of a limited number of studies, heterogeneousregarding patient populations and diagnostic proce-dures for VTE. Since then three large randomizedstudies have been published [6-8], each showingsignificant effect of prophylaxis with low-molecularweightheparin(LMWH)orfondaparinuxonasymptomatic deep vein thrombosis (DVT) but notsymptomatic VTE (Figs 1 and 2). Recently, a newmeta-analysis has been published on this subject [9].Although using the same search criteria as in ourstudy, our results differed in some aspects. This is initself interesting and will be discussed more in detailbelow. The aim of this study was to compare the effi-cacy and safety of unfractionated heparin (UFH)and LMWH including pentasaccharides versus pla-cebo in the prevention of VTE in acutely ill medicalinpatients.MethodsData sources
A literature search was performed to identify allpublished blinded randomized controlled trials onprophylaxis against VTE withUFH,LMWH orfondaparinux in acutely ill medical inpatients. TheelectronicdatabasesMEDLINE,EMBASEandCochrane database of clinical trials from 1980 topresentwereused.ArticlesweresearcheduntilOctober2006.Manualsearchwasperformedregarding abstracts from major meetings: Interna-tionalSocietyofThrombosisandHaemostasis,American Society of Hematology, International Con-gress of Thrombosis and International Stroke Con-ference.Referencelistsofidentifiedpublicationswere also scrutinized.Study selectionThree independent investigators performed the studyselection. Disagreements were resolved through dis-cussion in the group. The criteria for study selectionwere:* Published and abstracted randomized trials* Acutely ill medical inpatients* Comparison of fixed dose UFH, LMWH or fonda-parinux with placebo* Outcomes confirmed by objective diagnostic testing* At least 1 week of prophylaxis and follow-up forVTEStudy data extractionForeachstudy,threeindependentinvestigatorsextracted data regarding study quality, population,intervention and outcome. We accepted the author'sdefinitions of outcomes, and did not try to reclassifythe events. Symptomatic DVT had to be confirmed byvenography or compression ultrasound, pulmonaryembolism (PE; Fig. 3) by ventilation-perfusion lungscanning, pulmonary angiography, helical computedtomography or autopsy. For major bleeding (Fig. 4)the study definition was accepted. Intracranial bleed-ing had to be confirmed by computed tomography,magnetic resonance imaging or autopsy.The primary efficacy outcome was symptomatic VTEduring the time of follow-up defined in each study.Data regarding on-treatment and after-treatment peri-ods defined as secondary efficacy outcome in the ori-ginaltrialswerenotextracted.Primarysafetyoutcome was defined as major bleeding, intracranialbleeding or fatal bleeding (Fig. 5).
A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicenseStatistical analysisData were entered into the Cochrane CollaborationReview Manager package (RevMan 5). Heterogene-ity between the studies was assessed with the chi-squared test and the chosen summary statistic variablewas the reduction in relative risk (RR). The P-valuefor heterogeneity was above 0.10 in all analyses. Thefixed model was used for calculations. A random-effects model was tested but showed similar results.ResultsWe identified 10 studies assessing the prophylacticefficacy of heparin in acutely ill medical inpatients.Eight studies were blinded randomized controlledclinical trials, of which six used LMWH [6, 7, 10-13], one UFH [14] and one fondaparinux [8] as pro-phylaxis. The study using UFH [14] also includedpatients who had recently undergone surgery, and wastherefore excluded. The remaining two studies [15,16] were not blinded and compared UFH prophylaxiswith no treatment. The study characteristics are pre-sented in Table 1. The meta-analysis was performedonly on the seven blinded randomized controlled clin-ical trials in nonsurgical patients using LMWH orfondaparinux to avoid selection bias or heterogeneityin the results due to different treatment regimens.OutcomesThe main outcomes of LMWH prophylaxis or fonda-parinux are summarized in Table 2. Asymptomatic
DVT was by far the most common, with an incidenceof 5.9% in the control group. This rendered an absoluterisk reduction of 3.0%, number needed to treat (NNT)33 to prevent one event. The incidence of symptomaticVTE was much lower, giving NNT of 271 for symp-tomatic DVT and 241 for symptomatic PE. Majorbleeding according to the author's definitions was rare,slightly increased in the prophylaxis group giving anonsignificant number needed to harm (NNH) of 598.DiscussionA recent meta-analysis on anticoagulant prophylaxisfor preventing VTE in hospitalized medical patients[9] used the same search criteria as in this study, butreached a different result. A meta-analysis is generallythought to be the golden rule, enlarging the existingdata to reach as close to a reliable conclusion as pos-sible. However, a meta-analysis is very sensitive tostudiesincluded,theirheterogeneityanddataextracted. In the field of anticoagulation prophylaxisto prevent VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients, moststudies are small, use different heparins (UFH, variousLMWHs, fondaparinux), different end-points (fibrino-gen uptake test, ultrasound, phlebography, helicalcomputedtomography,pulmonaryscintigraphy,autopsy) and criteria vary for bleeding. The inclusioncriteria vary extensively as well as treatment durationand time to follow-up. Thus, it is possible to extractdifferent sets of data from the same group of studiesdepending on how end-points are selected for exami-nation in the meta-analysis.A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicensedurationEnd-point, timediagnosticsLow-molecularweight heparinDahan270Age >65, acutemedical illnessPharmukaPS10 daysperformedDiffuse
SamamaCongestive heartfailure (NYHA III-IV),20 mg ordailyaDVT day 6 andday 14,Intracranial. FatalFraisse223Acute decompensatedchronic obstructivepulmonary diseasewith mechanicalonce dailylongermechanicalVTE, PS21 daysUltrasoundscreeningVenographyAngiographyComputedtomographyHb drop ++2 g dL)1.Transfusion of 2RetroperitonealLeizorovicz3706Age ++40, projected++4 days. Congestiveacute or chronicrespiratory disease,infectious orrheumatologicdiseaseDalteparin14 daysVTE and suddendeath, day 21screeningVenographyScintigraphyAngiographyComputedtomographyHb drop ++2 g dL)1.Transfusion of 2or more bloodunits.RetroperitonealIntracranialSpinal / epidural.Fatal. Need forsubstantialMahehospitalized for<24 h, immobilized,acute medical illnessdailydischarge,PS21 daysAll-cause mortality,symptomaticVTE, PS21 daysVenographyAutopsyAngiographyAutopsyA. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicenseStudy, yearPatients(n)Indication forprophylaxisProphylaxisregimenTreatmentdurationEnd-point, timeDVTdiagnosticsPEdiagnosticsDefinition ofmajor bleedingLederlegeneral medicalEnoxaparin40 mg oncedailyUntilhospitalAll-causemortality,symptomaticVTE, day 90UltrasoundVenographyScintigraphyAngiographyAutopsyThe bleedingseverity index,Cohen849Age ++60, congestiveheart failure(NYHA III-IV),acute respiratory,infectious orinflammatoryhospitalization++4 daysFondaparinux2.5 mg oncedaily6-14 daysAsymptomaticVTE day 6 andday 15,symptomaticVenographyscreeningScintigraphyAngiographyComputedtomographyAutopsyHb drop ++2 g dL)1.Transfusion of 2or more bloodlocation. Needfor surgical
Unfractionated heparinBelch100Heart failure,chest infectiondailyUntilmobilizedAsymptomaticFibrinogenuptake testCade234Age >40, completebed rest, cardiacfailure, obesity,previous VTE,cancer or recentsurgeryUnfractionatedheparin,dailyor PS10 daysAsymptomaticFibrinogenuptake testNot performedNot described[16]11 693Age >55, infectiousdiseaseImmobilizationUnfractionatedheparin,dailyUntil hospitaldischarge,PS21 daysAutopsyverified PE,PS60 daysbleedingdiagnosedat autopsy
aData from Enoxaparin 20 mg was not extracted [6].A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicenseThe same problem with validity of meta-analyses isalso seen in the field of VTE prophylaxis in generalsurgery [17]. In this abstract five meta-analyses andtwo systematic reviews were compared. Despite sub-stantial differences in design, these meta-analysesarrived at similar conclusions.In the meta-analysis by Dentali et al. [9] the singlelargest study examining PE was only partly included[16], extracting data only from patients with PE dur-ing treatment with heparin. This study was excludedfrom our analysis as the comparison between UFHand no treatment was not blinded. This choice instudy selection conveys the largest difference inresults between the two meta-analyses. If this study isfully included, using the author's definition of time tofollow-up, the effect of heparin on preventing PE issubstantially reduced and no longer significant. Thiscould suggest that the prophylactic effect of heparinin this setting is only effective during the treatmentperiod, and that this effect will diminish over time. Ifso, the clinical benefit of short-term heparin prophy-laxis would be small. An alternative explanation isthat in this study UFH was used instead of the morerecent drugs LMWH and fondaparinux. Randomizedcomparisons of enoxaparin with UFH have been per-formed in medical patients with heart failure or severerespiratory failure [18] and in acute ischaemic stroke[19] showing less efficacy of UFH.There are differences between the two meta-analysesin terms of data extraction. The main difference is thatDentali et al. [9] chose to redefine the time of follow-up to be events during treatment with anticoagulation,
while we used the time of follow-up predefined as pri-mary outcome. We also excluded three events of sud-den death that were regarded as PE in one study [8],as these events were not objectively confirmed byautopsy or radiology. Another small study with open-label use of UFH compared to no treatment wasexcluded by us but included by Dentali et al. [9]. Herethey accepted two cases of PE that occurred 3 weeksafter follow-up, i.e. not during anticoagulation treat-ment as defined for data extraction in their meta-analy-sis. Despite all these differences in study selection anddataextraction,bothmeta-analysesshowsimilarresults. The main difference is in symptomatic PE,where Dentali et al. [9] show a highly significant pre-ventive effect of 62%, compared to 48% in our study,that is also significant.In our meta-analysis, LMWH prophylaxis in acutelyill medical patients prevented 48% of symptomaticPE, 48% of symptomatic DVT and 51% of asymp-tomatic DVT. As these end-points all are differentmanifestations of the same illness, VTE, one canargue that LMWH prophylaxis prevents approxi-mately half of the expected VTE. There is a trendtowards higher bleeding risk during LMWH prophy-laxis (RR = 1.39), although not significant. Death isalso not significantly affected by this treatment. NNTvaries from 271 in symptomatic DVT to 33 in asymp-tomatic DVT, mainly due to a much higher incidenceof the latter. In spite of extremely careful selection,the results in the individual studies had to be drivenby asymptomatic VTE. Only in a meta-analysis is thesmall benefit on symptomatic VTE discerned. Theabsolute majority of the asymptomatic VTE wereLMWHControlARR (%)NNT / NNHn%n%
A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons Licensedistal, and of questionable clinical significance. Forthe clinician, the important task is to identify thosepatients who have a sufficiently high risk for symp-tomatic VTE to warrant LMWH prophylaxis withoutan unnecessary risk of bleeding, i.e. a high net clini-cal benefit. Attempts have been made by risk scores[4] or registry searches [20] to identify groups ofacutely ill medical inpatients at higher risk of devel-oping VTE. Kucher et al. [21] identified a smallgroup of medical inpatients with a high incidence ofVTE, approximately 5% of all patients in the clinic.Among these, 80% had cancer which has to be con-sidered as a strong risk factor for VTE. Other thancancer, VTE prophylaxis might be considered inimmobile patients and in those with respiratory dis-ease, previous VTE, sepsis, congestive heart failure oracute inflammatory disease [4, 20-23]. More studiesare needed to create a better risk assessment for VTEthat can guide the clinician in everyday practice. Thisis important, as PE commonly causes death in non-surgical patients too. However, in a meta-analysis,only an effect on morbidity, not mortality, is shown.Conflict of interest statement
No conflict of interest was declared.References1 Bergqvist D. Low molecular weight heparin for the preventionof venous thromboembolism after abdominal surgery. Br J Surg2004; 91: 965-74.2 Geerts WH, Pineo GF, Heit JA et al. Prevention of venousthromboembolism: the Seventh ACCP Conference on Anti-thromboticandThrombolyticTherapy.Chest2004;126:338S-400S.3 Yu HT, Dylan ML, Lin J, Dubois RW. Hospitals' compliancewith prophylaxis guidelines for venous thromboembolism. Am JHealth Syst Pharm 2007; 1: 69-76.4 Zakai NA, Wright J, Cushman M. Risk factors for venousthrombosis in medical inpatients: validation of a thrombosis riskscore. J Thromb Haemost 2004; 2: 2156-61.5 Mismetti P, Laporte-Simitsidis S, Tardy B et al. Prevention ofvenous thrombosis in internal medicine with unfractioned orlow-molecular weight heparins: a meta-analysis of randomisedclinical trials. Thromb Haemost 2000; 83: 14-9.6 Samama MM, Cohen AT, Darmon J-Y et al. A comparison ofenoxaparin with placebo for the prevention of venous thrombo-embolism in acutely ill medical patients. N Engl J Med 1999;341: 793-800.
7 Leizorovicz A, Cohen AT, Turpie AGG, Olsson C-G, VaitkusPT, Goldhaber SZ. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of Dal-teparin for the prevention of venous thromboembolism inacutely ill medical patients. Circulation 2004; 110: 874-9.8 Cohen AT, Davidson BL, Gallus AS et al. Efficacy and safetyof fondaparinux for the prevention of venous thromboembolismin older acute medical patients: randomised placebo controlledtrial. BMJ 2006; 332: 325-9.9 Dentali F, Douketis JD, Gianni M, Lim W, Crowther MA.Meta-analysis: anticoagulant prophylaxis to prevent symptom-atic venous thromboembolism in hospitalized medical patients.Ann Intern med 2007; 146: 278-88.10 Mahe I, Bergmann J-F, dA' ze'mar P, Vaissie JJ, Caulin C.Lack of effect of a low-molecular weight heparin (nadroparin)on mortality in bedridden medical in-patients: a prospectiverandomised double-blind study. Eur J Pharmacol 2005; 61:347-51.11 Dahan R, Houlbert D, Caulin C et al. Prevention of deep veinthrombosis in elderly medical in-patients by a low molecularweight heparin: a randomized double-blind trial. Haemostasis1986; 16: 159-64.12 Fraisse F, Holzapfel L, Coulaud J-M et al. Nadroparin in theprevention of deep vein thrombosis in acute decompensatedCOPD. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161: 1109-14.13 Lederle FA, Sacks JM, Fiore L et al. The prophylaxis of medi-cal patients for thromboembolism pilot study. Am J Med 2006;119: 54-9.14 Cade JF, Andrews JT, Stubbs AE. Comparison of sodium andcalcium heparin in prevention of venous thromboembolism.Aust N Z J Med 1982; 12: 501-4.15 Belch JJ, Lowe GDO, Ward AG, Forbes CD, Prentice CRM.Prevention of deep vein thrombosis in medical patients by low-dose heparin. Scott Med J 1981; 26: 115-7.16 B, for the Heparin Prophylaxis Study Group. Rando-mised, controlled trial of low-dose heparin for prevention offatal pulmonary embolism in patients with infectious diseases.Lancet 1996; 347: 1357-61.17 Ljungstro"m K-G, Bergqvist D, Eliasson M. Validity of Meta-analyses on Thromboprophylaxis with Low Molecular WeightHeparin (LMWH) / Low-DoseHeparin (LDH). Philadelphia:International Society of Technology Assessment in Health Care(ISTAHC) 2001 (Abstract).18 Kleber F-X, Witt C, Vogel G, Koppenhagen K, Schomaker U,Flosbach CW. Randomized comparison of enoxaparin with un-fractionated heparin for the prevention of venous thromboembo-lism in medical patients with heart failure or severe respiratorydisease. Am Heart J 2003; 145: 614-21.19 Sherman DG, Albers GW, Bladin C et al. The efficacy andsafety of enoxaparin versus unfractionated heparin for the pre-vention of venous thromboembolism after acute ischaemicstroke (PREVAIL Study): an open-label randomised compari-son. Lancet 2007; 369: 1347-55.20 Monreal M, Kakkar AK, Caprini JA et al. The outcome aftertreatment of venous thromboembolism is different in surgicaland acutely ill medical inpatients. Findings from the RIETE reg-istry. J Thromb Haemost 2004; 2: 1892-8.
A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License21 Kucher N, Koo S, Quiroz R et al. Electronic alerts to preventvenous thromboembolism among hospitalized patients. N Engl JMed 2005; 352: 969-77.22 Alikhan R, Cohen AT, Combe S et al. Risk factors for venousthromboembolism in hospitalized patients with acute medicalillness. Arch Intern Med 2005; 164: 963-8.23 Labarere J, Bosson JL, Brion JP et al. Validation of a clinicalguideline on prevention of venous thromboembolism in medicalinpatients: a before-and-after study with systematic ultrasoundexamination. J Intern Med 2004; 256: 338-48.24 Landefeld CS, Anderson PA, Goodnough LT et al. The bleedingseverity index: validation and comparison to other methods forclassifying bleeding complications of medical therapy. J ClinEpidemiol 1989; 42: 711-8.Correspondence: Anders Sja"lander, Department of Internal Medi-cine, Sundsvall Hospital, SE 85186 Sundsvall, Sweden.(fax: +4660182004; e-mail: A. Sja"lander et al. |Prevention of VTE in acutely ill medical inpatients 13652796, 2008, 1, Downloaded from  by Cochrane Germany, Wiley Online Library on [27/09/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions ( on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
