Review ArticleThe validity and reliability of using ultrasound  elastography to measure cutaneous  stiffness, a systematic reviewHelen M DeJong1,2,3, Steven Abbott4, Marilyn Zelesco4, Brendan F Kennedy3,5, Mel R Ziman2, Fiona M Wood6,7,8,91Perth Scar and Pain Clinic, Mount Pleasant, Western Australia, 6153, Australia; 2School of Medical and Health Science, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, 6027, Australia; 3BRITElab, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre Nedlands and Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, 6009, Australia; 4Department of Medical Imaging, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australian, 6150, Australia; 5School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, The University of Western Australia Crawley, 6009, Western Australia; 6Burn Injury Research Unit, The University of Western Australia Crawley, Western Australia, 6009, Australia; 7Burn Service of Western Australia, Fiona Stan-ley Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australian, 6150, Australia; 8Child and Adolescent Health Service of Western Australia, Princess Margaret Hospital, Subiaco, Western Australia, 6008, Australia; 9Fiona Wood Foundation Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, Western Australian, 6150, AustraliaReceived September 8, 2017; Accepted September 28, 2017; Epub December 20, 2017; Published December 30, 2017
Abstract: Background: Ultrasound elastography is an imaging technology which can objectively and non-invasively Objective: To examine current, published research evaluating the use of ultrasound elastography for the measure-ment of cutaneous or subcutaneous stiffness and to determine the level of validity and reliability, recommended methodologies and limitations. Methods: MEDLINE, Web of science and Scopus were systematically searched in August 2016 to identify original articles evaluating the use of ultrasound elastography to assess cutaneous stiff-ness. Relevant studies were then quality evaluated using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies v 2 (QUADAS-2) tool and the Quality Appraisal of Reliability Studies (QAREL). Results: From a total of 688 articles, 14 met the inclusion criteria for full review. Within the 14 studies, elastography was used to evaluate tumors, systemic interrater reliability, whereas all validity studies had low sample sizes and demonstrated risks of bias. Conclusion: Robust evidence supporting the use of ultrasound elastography as a diagnostic tool in cutaneous conditions is low, however, initial indicators support further research to establish the utility of ultrasound elastography in dermatology.Keywords: Elastography, sonoelastography, shear-wave, strain imaging, elasticity imaging techniques, objective skin assessment, dermatology, cutaneousIntroductionNumerous cutaneous conditions are associat-including scarring, scleroderma, eczema, pso-riasis and skin cancers. These conditions are typically assessed subjectively in clinical prac-tice using both visual and palpation techniques [1]. However, objective, non-invasive methods to quantify the physiological changes in skin are required to improve diagnostic accuracy, to quantify disease severity and progression, and 
Elastography is an emerging imaging technolo-gy that provides an objective method to map the relative or absolute stiffness of soft tissue. First introduced in 1991 [2], elastography has been integrated into a number of imaging plat-forms including ultrasound, magnetic reso-nance imaging [3], optical coherence tomogra-phy [4-6], and atomic force microscopy [7]. Ultrasound elastography (UE) is showing the most promise clinically, as a relatively low cost, portable option that is easy to operate, and pro-vides real time images of soft tissue mechani-commercialized as an integrated system in 2003 [8], and is now available from all the major ultrasound imaging system manufactur-ers. It uses non-ionizing radiation and is there-fore safe for repeated clinical use [3]. The utility is expanding with UE used to identify tissue stiffness associated with disorders of the thy-roid [9], pancreas [10], liver [11], breast [12, 13] and musculoskeletal function and dysfunc-tion [14-16]. Recently, expansion of UE to cuta-neous research has resulted in studies to iden-tify skin tumors [17, 18], systemic sclerosis [19], and abscess induration [20, 21].To evaluate the potential application of UE in the assessment of skin stiffness associated with scarring, this systematic review examined original research that investigated the diagnos-tic accuracy of UE to measure skin stiffness in a variety of cutaneous diagnostic groups. The aim was to determine the validity and reliability of UE in dermatological conditions, to identify appropriate methodology to minimize result bias, and to identify any perceived limitations of UE. In this review, we investigated the follow-ing hypothesis: Ultrasound elastography is a valid and reliable tool for assessing cutaneous -view the different types of UE and the methods of data acquisition employed, we then describe 
the methods and results of the systematic -tions and limitations of the use of UE in cutane-ous conditions.BackgroundUltrasound elastography (UE)UE, sometimes referred to as sonoelastogra-phy, was developed to characterize the mechan-ical properties of biological tissues in vivo. As per conventional brightness mode (B-mode) ultrasound (US), acoustic signals are directed scattered at tissue boundaries that exhibit dis-tinct acoustic properties. This provides a grey scale image of tissue structure. However, UE also introduces a form of mechanical excitation to deform the tissue. This tissue motion is cap-tured by multiple B-mode images. A softer tis-sue undergoes more strain (regional change in tissue thickness divided by initial thickness) than a stiffer tissue, when subjected to the same magnitude of force. Algorithms to esti-mate a mechanical parameter, such as strain or elasticity are then employed to map the rela-tive or absolute elasticity into an image, referred to as an elastogram (Figure 1B). Each color pixel in the elastogram is an estimation of the mechanical property or parameter at that loca-tion. The elastogram is often visualized as an overlay on the B-mode sonogram, allowing the user to interpret both structural and mechani-Ultrasound elastography in dermatologycal properties of the tissue simultaneously. The color scale can vary, as no standard has been universally employed by device manufacturers [22]: in many instances, red represents stiffer tissue and blue represents softer tissues as shown in Figure 1. However, in other instances the scale is reversed [23]. The methods used to generate quantitative information from elasto-grams differ according to the type of elastogra-phy system used. 
Types of ultrasound elastography Measurement modalities currently used in UE include both strain imaging (SI) or shear wave elastography imaging (SWEI) [8]. They both use various forms of mechanical stimulus to deform soft tissues including compression, acoustic radiation force (ARF), vibration [3, 24], or physi-ological movements. Both compression and ARF techniques have been used in dermatolo-gy, whereas vibration is used mostly in liver imaging [25], and physiological movements are used in cardiovascular [8], gastrointestinal [23], respiratory [8, 26] and musculoskeletal imaging [27, 28]. 
Compression techniques employ a vertical load, applied perpendicular to the skin, usually by means of the ultrasound imaging transducer (Figure 2). This can be achieved in one slow compression (static or quasi static) or by multi-ple, rapid compressions or vibrations (dynamic) depending on the implementation used in the UE system [29]. Local strain is measured by cal-culating the degree of tissue deformation with respect to depth, and consequently, it is not a direct measurement of tissue stiffness. The resulting elastogram is therefore qualitative, and provides information regarding the relative differences in strain between adjacent tissues [3]. Compression techniques are highly depen-dent on both the magnitude and spatial distri-bution of the applied force, which requires skilled operators to ensure a uniform contact force is applied at an optimal magnitude. Too little compression may not generate enough contrast between the tissues and too much compression can negate the relative differenc-es, due to the nonlinear relationship between stress and strain in soft tissues such as skin [8]. However, a number of UE systems have introduced indicators to signify when optimal compression has been reached [23]. The reporting of strain elastograms can consist of either a subjective description of the color pre-sentation in the elastogram [21], a semi-quan-titative numerical scale developed to subjec-tively rate the heterogeneity and distribution of colors in the elastogram [30-32], or a strain ratio calculated between the area of interest (ROI) and surrounding non-affected tissue with-Ultrasound elastography in dermatology
In contrast to compression, ARF is an acoustic force 'push pulse' (Figure 3) generated by the UE system, providing a more controlled magni-tude of force. The push pulse is focused at  -sue deformation on the order of micrometers (1x10-6 meters) [3]. ARF imaging (ARFI) provides an analysis of tissue deformation in response to ARF, however, like SI using compression, ARFI is still a relative measure providing only qualitative elastograms. In addition to generating a highly focused point of tissue displacement, ARF also generates shear waves orthogonal to the incident sound wave (Figure 3), which ripple through the tis-sues at velocities typically in the range of 1-10 meters per second. In SWEI, the velocity of the shear waves propagating through the tissues is tracked to provide a quantitative measure of tissue stiffness [35]. An increasing shear wave velocity correlates with increasing tissue stiff-ness [22]. Different shear wave velocities are assigned different colors to create the elasto-gram, providing a 2D visual display of tissue mechanical heterogeneity [36]. In addition to producing an image, point shear wave velocity      ROIs on the elastogram, which can then be used to estimate the Young's modulus, provid-ing a quantitative measurement of stiffness, measured in kilopascals (kPa) [35, 37]. SWEI is less dependent on the level of operator skill [38], however the operator still needs to ensure minimal pressure is applied to reduce interfer-ence of shear wave propagation [8].
MethodologyThe methodology of this review was guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) state-ment [39, 40]. A systematic search of the litera-ture was conducted independently by two authors (H.D and S.A.) in August 2016 using the electronic databases Medline, Web of Science, and Scopus. The purpose of the search was to identify original published research evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of UE to measure the stiffness of skin or subcutaneous adipose tis-sues. A preliminary search in the Cochrane Library and the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination did not identify any previous sys-tematic reviews on this topic.Search parametersThe search was limited to peer reviewed papers published in English after 2003, the year UE      performed of titles, abstracts and keywords to maximise article retrieval. The keywords for the search included: 'skin', 'derma*', 'dermis', 'cutaneous', 'cutis', 'subcutaneous', 'subcutis', 'fat', 'adipose', 'fascia', 'elastography', sono-elastography, and the mesh term 'elasticity imaging techniques'. Various combinations of the above terms were included in the searches 
were utilized within each database (Table 1). The papers were manually screened based on the title and abstract content, and excluded if it obviously did not meet the inclusion criteria. Full text reviews were performed to further met the criteria. Lastly the reference lists of all papers included in the review were manually searched to ensure all related publications were included in this comprehensive review.Inclusion and exclusion criteriaPublished articles evaluating the use of UE within human, cutaneous or subcutaneous-adi-pose tissues were included in the review, in order to evaluate the potential application in assessing burn scars. All study designs were included to ensure all relevant evidence was      described in case reports were not omitted. Only studies that evaluated a commercially available, fully integrated UE system capable of measuring both skin and subcutaneous tissues were included to allow for potential replication of study designs. Therefore, papers using tran-sient elastography, or elastography based on other imaging techniques, such as optical coherence tomography, computed tomography or atomic force microscopy were excluded, as were those that evaluated tissue elasticity by manually combining ultrasound with another objective measuring device (e.g. extensome-ter). Studies testing new (non-commercially available) devices or purely evaluating the engi-neering, physics or mathematical modelling of elastography were also excluded. Although these studies provide evidence of equipment validity, the scope of this project was to investi-gate the validity and reliability of the clinical 
Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyapplication. Likewise, research conducted exclusively on phantom tissues or on body organs other than the skin and/or subcutane-ous adipose tissues (e.g. breast, liver, thyroid, and musculoskeletal) were excluded.Quality criteriaThe papers included for review were assessed for risks of bias using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies - 2 (QUADAS-2) tool ( whi- ch is a validated and reliable tool to assess the study's methodological level of bias in four cat-egories: 1) patient selection, 2) index test, 3) using signaling questions to identify areas of either high risk, low risk, unclear or not appli-cable [41].      -tions for assessing validity and reliability were guided by the Consensus-based standards  for the selection of health measurement Instruments (COSMIN), () and the review of quality was based on the Quality Appraisal of Reliability Studies (QAREL) [42]. A checklist composed of ten questions was adapted from these assessment tools to cover aspects not evaluated in the QUADAS-2 (Table 1).Data extractionThe data was extracted using a predesigned data extraction document which included the study design, study aim, sample size, diagnos-tic group, patient demographics, UE system      (probes, MHz), the reference tool, methodology, measured values, clinimetric evaluations con-ducted, analysis used and the reported results, limitations and recommendations. 
Data synthesisDue to the variations in patient diagnostic groups, direct comparison of all the studies was not feasible [43], therefore a descriptive analysis of the studies within each diagnostic group is presented and the overall clinimetric evidence of elastography will be summarized.Protocol publication and ethics The protocol was written and submitted a priori to the Edith Cowan School of Medical and Health Sciences Ethics Subcommittee. An eth-ics declaration was approved on 15/08/2016: project number 16468 DEJONG.ResultsThe data bases were searched independently (Table 1). Medline yielded 234, Web of Science 262, and Scopus yielded 192 potential papers SearchSearch wordsArticles retrievedMEDLINEWeb of ScienceScopus#1skin or derma* or dermis or cutaneous or cutis7617726414991272045# 2subcutaneous or subcutis or fat or adipose or fascia362231409907670890#3elastography or sonoelastography or 'elasticity imaging techniques'661197947800#7After removing duplicates, screening of titles, abstracts and keywords54+14+8Total Articles: 76skin physiological phenomena (24). Scopus was limited to medicine - (370), and excluded: biochemistry, genetics and molecu-lar biology (56); Engineering (47); Physics and Astronomy (32); Materials science (23); Computer Science (18); Agricultural and Biological Sciences (3) and Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmaceutics (3); letters (14) and book chapter (2); Review (28); (79); dermatology (36); Medicine general internal (14); Multidisciplinary science (12); Oncology (11); nursing (2); Radiology nuclear medicine medical imaging (200); Surgery (19); Biophysics (29), limited to articles only.Ultrasound elastography in dermatology
GroupMain ObjectiveUE typeSample sizeElastogram AnalysisResultsReferenceCutaneous Mela-noma Convergent validitySIN=39 patients (42 lesions) 1. Intra dermal descriptive analysis: (low = red, medium = green or high = blue)2. Strain ratio (tumor/dermis & tumor/hypodermis.2. UE appearance and US thickness: rs=-0.305, p=0.049. Thicker tumors were stiffer. 3. Strain ratio average tumor/dermis =1.02 tumor/hypodermis Melanoma by Use of Very-High-Frequency Ultrasound and Real-Time Elastography. Botar-Jid et al. 2016 [33]Malignant and benign skin 2. Sensitivity/SIN=55 patients, (69 lesions) 1. Intradermal descriptive analysis: Blue =less elastic; red more elastic. 2. Strain ratio (tumor/adjacent 'green' tissue2. Strain ratio of malignant lesions =3.9-32.2; & Benign lesions raphy in the assessment of cutaneous carcinoma Dasgeb Mixed tumor of scalpSIN=1 Descriptive analysis of color (red = soft, blue = hard)with a red (soft) cord-like portion, with a green (medium elastic-ity) background. Green portion correlated with closely aggregated myoepithelial cells around the sweat gland. The yellow area corresponded to a broad mucinous region, empty space and the chondroid portion.Elastographic Findings of Mixed Tumour of the Skin on the Scalp. Imafuku et al. Angiomatoid -tomaDescribe unique  An area of increased elastic-ity (soft) within the tumor corresponded to a pseudovascular structure.-MelanomaDescribe a unique and 0.95 mm. The tumor had dark blue areas within lesion, whereas a benign nevus had a green pattern on UE.a helpful tool in the diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma? Hinz et al. 2011 [53]Cutaneous T-cell LymphomaDescribe a unique SIN=1Descriptive analysis of color. Blue = stiff, red= soft.whereas epidermal cyst had a green appearanceT-cell lymphoma. Schmid-Wendher et al. 2011 [54]
sis and diffuse temic sclerosis1 Discriminant reliablitySWEIN=15 patients N=15 matched healthy controls 17 body sites on each participant Total sample: 510 skin sites.SWV1. Patients had increase SWV at 6/17 body sites. mRSS 0, 1 & 2 3. ICC good for 15/17 body sites (ICC=0.613-0.916), moderate A preliminary study of acoustic radiation force assessment of skin in diffuse Hou et al. 2015 [38]Systemic Sclero-sis, Morphea and GVHD1. Convergent valid-ity, Discriminant validity, Test retest ARFI-D N=4 healthy N=12 morphes N=1 SSc N=5 GVHD with contralateral site matched controls Total sample: 22 participants1. ARFI-DDescriptive analysis of selected case examples demonstrating:1. Both SWV and ARFI-D can detect differences between SSc and 3. SWV showed less errors than ARFI-D4. SWV were more consistent than ARFI-D over time.Preliminary Results on the Feasibility of Using ARFI/SWEI To assess Cutaneous Sclerotic Diseases. Yun Lee et al. 2015 Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyrosis (perioral region)validity, Interrater reliabilitySIN=6 female patients N=6 female age-matched controls 4 body sites on each par-ticipant1. Descriptive analysis and score: Blue score=1 Green score=2 Red score=3. 4 locations measured on each patient and summated for a total score ranging from 4-121. American College of Rheumatology criteria: Found SSC was predominantly blue with green spots stiffer than controls score and individual measurements.Technical feasibility of real-time elastography to assess the peri-oral region in patients affected by systemic sclerosis Cannao et al. 2014 [30]Systemic Scle-1. Test-retest reli-abilityvalidity and Conver-gent validity
2. N=26 patients N=17 age and gender matched SWV1. Very good test-retest reliability ICC>0.08, tested 1 week apart.2. Patients with SSc showed increased stiffness compared to 3. Stiffness correlated with mRSS4. Increased stiffness recorded in clinically 'unaffected' skin, mRSS*=0.A preliminary study using virtual touch imaging and -sessment of skin stiffness in systemic sclerosis Santiago et rosis1. Discriminant validity, Interrater rater reliability, Test-retest reliability SIN=18 patientsN=15 age matched control1. Descriptive color scale: red = soft green/pale blue = soft blue = hard1. mRSS*: Sclerotic dermis was blue, healthy control dermis was results.2. two raters: No data presented, stated that both assessors had 4. No data: Images stored and re-evaluated 4 weeks post initial assessment. sessment of skin involvement in systemic sclerosis: lights and LDS.1. Convergent SIN=62 Lymphedema legsN=15 LDS legsStrain ratio: skin/phantom & scAT/phantom1. No difference between ISL stages O, I, II, III of skin or scAT in thigh.2. No difference between ISL stages 0, I, II, III of scAT of calf.4. Calf skin was stiffer in ISL stage III compared to stage I and II, Skin and subcutaneous tissue strain in legs with lymphede-ma and lipodermatosclerosis. Suehiro et al. 2015 [34]normal controlsvaliditySI1. 7mm gel standoff2. N=35 healthy controls 3. N=15 patients each with affected leg and non-affected control leg.1. Peak force strain2. Strain ratio: skin/phantom & scAT/phan-tom3. linear regression1. Optimal manual compression force on 7mm gel standoff 2. Normal control demonstrated greatest strain in the ScAT thigh, followed by ScAT calf, skin thigh then skin calf.3. No difference detected between ISL stage II unilateral lymph-edema leg and non-affected leg.phy assessment of skin and subcutaneous tissue strains in legs with lymphedema. Suehiro et al. 2014 [56]
Skin and subcu-taneous abscessDiscriminate SIN=50 patientsDescriptive analysis: red = softest, yellow = soft, green -ent bands large spot small specklesdiagnosis: UE: abscesses were mixed red and yellow to mixed yellow and green.Tissue Induration: blue with sharp delineation.Use of ultrasound elastogra-phy for skin and subcutane-ous abscesses Gaspari et al. Post Irradiation 1. Interrater, Intra-rater reliability 2. Discriminate validitySWEI1. N=30, 14 patients and 16 2. N=50, 25 patients and 25 controls.The system software calcu-lated a mean stiffness value for the ROI.1. Interrater: ICC=0.77-0.94Intrarater: ICC=0.90-0.992. Irradiated neck tissue stiffer than normal control: 63.9+-53.1 3. Stiffness progressively became stiffer with time post irradia-tion. Shear Wave Elastography-A New Quantitative Assessment of Post-Irradiation Neck Fibro-sis. Liu et al. 2015 [57]Rodnan Skin Score; ROI: Region of Interest ; SI: Strain Imaging; ScAT: Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue; SSc: Systemic sclerosis; SWEI: Shear wave elasticity imaging; SWV: Shear Wave Velocity; UE: Ultrasound Elastography.Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyfor inclusion. These papers were then further screened by titles, keywords and abstracts, duplicates were removed a further 14 were in Scopus. A total of 76 papers underwent a full text screen and a further 52 were removed for not meeting the inclusion criteria, leaving a total of 23 for critical review. Following critical review one paper [44], was excluded as the UE component was used to measure tissue thick-ness rather than tissue stiffness, three papers using the Tissue Ultrasound Palpation System (TUPS) were excluded as the system is no lon-ger commercially available [45-47], an addi-tional three papers were excluded as they did not document the UE system they used [48-50] (not commercially available) which was also excluded [51]. The citations listed within each included paper were also reviewed, however did not generate any additional papers.
      2009 and August 2016 were included in the full critical review (Table 2). Eleven papers studied     cutaneous/subcutaneous lesions (N=6), sys-temic sclerosis (N=5), lymphedema (N=2), skin -sis (N=1). Six studies evaluated the clinimetric properties of their assessment protocols, including interrater reliability (N=4), intra-rater reliability (N=2) and/or test-retest reliability (N=3) whilst others tested criterion validity (N=2), convergent validity (N=6), and/or dis-criminate validity (N=7). Quality ratingReliability: Reliability studies (Table 3) were completed by six of the 14 studies; four assessed interrater reliability [30, 38, 55, 57], two intra-rater reliably [55, 57] and three assessed test-retest reliability [19, 35, 55]. However only three studies had adequate sam-ple sizes: two evaluated SWEI [38, 57] and one evaluated SI [55]. The other three studies [19, 30, 35] had samples sizes below 30 [58]. 
Liu et al. [57] studied the use of SWEI in post-on a fair sample size (N=30), including patients (N=14) and healthy controls (N=16). Two opera-tors were blinded to the velocity point measure-ments displayed on the monitor and to each other's measurement to test the inter-rater reli-      same patients on the same day, to evaluate intra-rater reliability. Both intra- and inter-rater reliability were high (ICC=0.84-0.95 and ICC=0.77-0.94 respectively). A second study evaluated the interrater reliability of SWEI to assess participants diagnosed with systemic sclerosis [38]. Seventeen body sites were mea-sured by two physicians blinded to each other, on a sample of 15 patients and 15 healthy con-trols. Each body site was independently evalu-ated for reliability. The interrater reliability was high for 15 of the 17 body sites (ICC=0.613-      Iagnocco et al. [55] evaluated interrater, intra-rater and test-retest reliability on a fair sample size of 32 participants, 18 with systemic sclero-sis and 15 healthy controls. Two anatomical sites (volar aspect of forearm and the dorsal        dichotomous key (stiff tissue = blue, soft tissue = pale blue, green and red). Two blinded sonog-raphers acquired two images for each site, however it wasn't clear whether only one image was analyzed or both. The saved images were then evaluated by both sonographers indepen-dently to evaluate interrater reliability of image analysis. The evaluation was repeated 4 weeks later to assess test-retest reliability. They found -rater and test-retest analyses, however a Cohen's Kappa was not reported.
The three studies with inadequate sample sizes included Cannao et al. [30], who reported a perfect interrater reliability (Cohen's Kappa =1) when using SI on six participants with systemic sclerosis and six healthy controls. Two addition-al studies evaluated test-retest reliability. Santiago et al. [19] reported a high ICC=0.9, on a sample size of six, using SWEI to evaluate sys-temic sclerosis; and Yun Lee et al. [35] provided a preliminary report of a single selected case study from a sample size of 22 patients with        whether these results are representative of the entire cohort.Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyStudies evaluating Strain elastographyStudies evaluating shear wave elastographySuehiro, 1. Was interrater reliability of index test reported?NYYNNNNNYYNN/AYYN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AYYN/A3. Was intra-rater reliability of index test reported?NNNNNNNNNYNN/AYN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AYN/A5. Was test-retest reliability of index test reported?NYNNNNNYN/ANY6. Was the stability of the variable being measured taken into ac-count when determining the time interval between repeat measures?N/AYN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AYN/AN/A?7. Were raters blinded to additional cues that could bias results.N/AYNN/AN/AN/AN/AYNYN8. Was the sample size included in the analysis adequate?N/AYNN/AN/AN/AN/ANYYN(ICC) calculated?N/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AYYYN
10. For dichotomous/nominal/ordinal scores: was a kappa calcu-lated?N/ANYN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AY Yes, N No, ? unclear N/A Not Applicable.Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyValidity: Quality assessment (Tables 2 and 4) demonstrated all studies had at least one risk of bias. The primary area of bias was with patient selection, whereby none of the studies       calculations to test their hypothesis. Most stud-ies could be considered exploratory, feasibility or pilot studies for which sample size calcula-tions are not required [59]. However, this means all results regarding validity are taken with cau-tion until larger studies with adequate power calculations are completed. In addition, with only two studies providing adequate interrater reliability, it is uncertain whether the protocols provided consistent results, which can produce a risk of index test bias.Discussion and recommendations       -neous study published in 2009. Since then, its use in cutaneous research has increased with        after 2015. The testing of UE in dermatology is still in the early clinical phase with initial explor-
of UE in cutaneous conditions.The case-controlled and cross section studies both calculated strain ratios to evaluate the sensitivity of SI to diagnose malignant skin can-cers. Dasgeb et al. [17] assessed 67 clinically suspicious skin lesions prior to biopsy. The strain ratio was calculated between a ROI with-in the tumor and a ROI in adjacent healthy tis-had strain ratios equal to or above 3.9 whereas        equal to or below 3.0. This is consistent with evidence from breast cancer UE whereby strain ratios were higher in breast malignancies (aver-age 3.04+-0.9) compared to benign tumors (average 1.91+-0.75) [32, 61]. Botar-Jid et al. calculated strain ratios between melanomas and normal dermis, and the melanoma and the hypodermis in 37 participants and found the strain ratios were lower: tumor/dermis (1.02, p=0.002) and the tumor/hypodermis (2.16, p=0.001). However, the malignant lesions assessed by Dasgeb et al. consisted of basal cell carcinomas (N=17), and squamous cell car-cinomas (N=12), rather than melanomas, which may explain the differences in results between the two studies. In addition, their chosen meth-odologies may contribute to the difference: Dasgeb et al. used either a 2 mm or 4 mm ultra-sound standoff gel pad, whereas Botar-Jid et al. skin is more vulnerable to artifacts caused by excessive or inadequate compression of the SI probe [22]. Although both UE systems had qual-ity indicators, neither study assessed the reli-ability of their protocols prior to their study. A stand-off gel pad is recommended for imaging 
LLLLLLLLLL?    9. Were the reference standard results interpreted without knowledge of the results of the index test?LLLLLL?LL??Flow and Timing    10. Was there an appropriate interval between the index test and the reference standard?LLN/AN/ALN/ALLLN/AN/A    11. Did all patients receive the same reference standard?LLLLLLLLLL?    12. Were all patients included in the analysis?LLLLHLHLLLHL Low Risk, H High Risk, ? unclear, N/A Not Applicable.Ultrasound elastography in dermatologyreported, however it was based on a small sam-ple size of 12. The two studies in lymphedema [34, 56] were produced by the same author who assessed the feasibility of using UE to measure skin and subcutaneous adipose tis-sue (ScAT) stiffness in the thigh and calf of      -oped a protocol to use a 7 mm stand-off gel pad as a coupling medium. The gel pad was repeatedly compressed under various forces       was between 50 and 200 g to acquire consis-tent elastograms. In contrast to the previous skin tumor studies, the second part of this study evaluated the stand-off gel pad as a ref-erence standard for strain ratio calculations, rather than adjacent healthy tissue. 35 healthy participants (70 legs) were assessed providing both strain measurements of the skin and scAT and strain-ratio data for the skin/stand-off and the scAT/stand-off. However, the strain ratio by the strain in the stand-off gel pad, therefore it was determined that direct strain measure-ments of the skin and scAT were more suitable calculations compared to the ratios. Further of a stand-off gel pad in UE.Initial evidence of discriminate validity was demonstrated in a study evaluating post-irradi-
sectional study of 50 people (N=25 patients and 25 gender and age matched controls), the patients post irradiation treatment had a statis--lus (63.9+-53.1 kPa) compared to health con-trols (15.3+-8.37 kPa, p, 0.001). In addition, me- asurements of subcutaneous adipose (scAT) neck stiffness correlated to time post irradia---gressive. Furthermore, Young's modulus ne- gatively correlated with scAT thickness (r= -ing that thinner subcutaneous tissues were      research into the use of UE as a biomarker for complications of radiotherapy, to assess both -sis) post treatment and to develop a better understanding of the associations between radiotherapy scarring and other post-irradiation more effectively in the clinical setting.
Initial suggestions of discriminate validity were       sclerosis. All studies used the accepted clinical            categories (0-3) of severity based on palpation. Patients with systemic sclerosis had stiffer skin compared to healthy controls in studies evalu-ating SI [30, 55] and studies evaluating SWEI [19, 35, 38]. The methodology however, varied between the studies. Using SI Iagnocco et al. [55] used a dichotomous descriptive scale whereby blue represented stiff tissue and all other colors represented soft tissue. Two blind-ed raters found all patients with sclerotic skin (N=18) had visibly stiffer skin on the elasto-gram compared to healthy controls (N=15). However, being a dichotomous scale, it is not sensitive to the severity or progression of the disease. Cannoa et al. [30] developed a three-point scale to visually assess the elastogram of SI, Blue (hard) =1, green (intermediate) =2, and red (soft) =3, and assessed 4 positions on each patient in the perioral region to provide a total score out of 12 for each individual. They found patients with systemic sclerosis (N=6) were consistently stiffer with median total score of 6 (IQR, 4-6), whereas controls (N= 0.011). This scoring system provides an increased sensitivity compared to the dichoto-mous scale, and aligns more closely with the 4 point mRSS in scleroderma assessment how-ever, it still doesn't provide a comprehensive scale to evaluate mixed color variations within the ROI. Development of standardized qualita-tive assessments tools akin to the breast mass Tsukuba score whereby the color and percent-age of color displayed in the elastogram is cat-egorized into a 5-stage scoring system [31, 32],      Although variations may be required for indi-
to have a standard scoring guide to be used for differential diagnostic purposes in all cutane-ous conditions. Both reliability and validity can then be evaluated to potentially reduce the risk of bias in future studies.In contrast to SI, two studies evaluating SWEI demonstrated initial suggestions of both dis-Ultrasound elastography in dermatologycriminate and convergent validity. Hou et al. [38] assessed 30 participants, 15 patients with systemic sclerosis and 15 healthy controls -ferences between healthy controls and mRSS 3. In addition, SWEI was able to distinguish -ferent to mRSS levels 0, 1, and 2. Santiago et al. [19], found 26 patients with systemic sclero--pared to the 17 healthy controls in 11 out of 16 anatomical sites tested. In addition, SWV strongly correlated to mRSS in seven of the 16 thigh and left hand). Pearson correlation coef-r=0.748 at the left phalanx. Although the sam-ple sizes were low in both studies, these results suggest SWEi has the ability to quantify the stiffness of tissues on a continuous scale cor-relating to the clinical assessment of severity.Three studies presented initial evidence that UE can provide preclinical indicators (mRSS level 0) of skin stiffness in patients with sys-temic sclerosis, [19, 38, 55]. The extent of skin involvement in systemic sclerosis predicts internal organ involvement and the general out-come for patients [38]. Therefore, UE has the potential to provide both an earlier diagnosis and a more sensitive assessment of disease progression compared to the subjective clinical assessment. UE provides unique information of tissue change not detectable by other forms of imag-ing. Hata et al. [52] described a soft central      visualized on the elastogram which corre-sponded to a pseudovascular structure (a not detected by either color Doppler or US. In addition, neither US or Doppler detected an area of induration surrounding abscesses using UE [21]. Continued research by this group 
review), demonstrated that the shape of the induration was a predictor of therapy failure       treatment options for this patient group [20]. Biological tissues may demonstrate a uniform B-mode US echogenicity, however have very different mechanical properties. The unique ability of UE to image the mechanical proper-ties of tissues can provide unique information, not captured by other imaging modalities.Lastly, elastography has the ability to provide select information regarding the stiffness of individual tissue layers. The stiffness of skin and subcutaneous adipose tissues were assessed independently in the two studies by Suehiro et al. [34, 56], dermal stiffness was isolated in a study by Yun Lee et al. [35], and subcutaneous adipose tissue stiffness was measured independently to both the underlying muscle and the overlying skin in patients post -ment tools used in the past have only been able to assess bulk or gross tissue stiffness with the application of direct manual forces via either extension [62], suction [63-65], torsion [66] or vertical displacement [67, 68]. However, each layer in the skin-hypodermal complex is struc-turally and functional different [69, 70], with each independently altering the mechanical property of the tissue as a whole [51, 71-73]. With an increasing interest in how the mechani-disease development [74, 75], UE can provide precise and detailed information on select tis-sues in vivo, both qualitatively and quantitative-ly, which could assist in the non-invasive research of understanding human pathophysi-ology of skin disease and dysfunction.Potential limitations of elastographyA number of potential limitations were identi-studies. Using SWEI to assess patients with systemic sclerosis, Hou et al. [38] calculated (ICC=0.535) and low ICC for the dorsal right      high ICC were reported for the other 15 of the 17 body sites tested (ICC=0.613-0.916). Iagn- occo et al         
reliability. A number of reasons could explain surface may not allow a stable, perpendicular Ultrasound elastography in dermatologypositioning of the probe reducing the quality of image acquisition [38], the close proximity of       -or the amount ultrasound gel may have been      its own force to measure tissue stiffness, like SI, it is still sensitive to the amount of contact compression. Increased compression correlat-ed with increased shear wave velocity in both breast and prostate imaging [8], therefore, fur-ther research is recommended to evaluate pro--sues with and without a stand-off gel. An additional limitation of SI was demonstrated when assessing painful conditions [21]. The contact force required to acquire an image increased the experience of pain in some patients with an abscess, which may have resulted in inadequate compression to gener-ate an optimal image. SWEI, however does not require additional compression and therefore may be more appropriate for painful or sensi-tive skin.Three studies demonstrated potential limita--
with B-mode US [21]. Although pain may have been a factor in some of these cases, cysts within breast tissue appear as black color voids when measured with SWEI [23]. In addition, SI was not effective at discriminating differences in tissue stiffness between legs with lymphede-      [56]. SWEI has however, been used in the assessment of musculoskeletal tissues affect-are recommended to evaluate the effects of     -tion of tissue stiffness, the results are not yet comparable between different commercial sys-magnitude and application of ARF, and the cal-software associated with each UE system. In     results including the ROI size, shape (either round [57], or square [19]), and ROI position on the elastogram, which can be placed on either the visually stiffest region, softest region or a region of mixed stiffness. Therefore, SWEI does not provide an absolute measure of stiffness [8, 23] and transparent methodology is required to determine valid and reproducible research protocols, to allow comparisons between future studies.Finally, because cutaneous conditions are often highly visible, protocols for assessment should attempt to reduce the risk of bias.  Ten of the reviewed studies only utilized a single sonographer/clinician to both acquire and ana-lyze the image, which could result in an overes-timation of assessment accuracy. Gaspari et al. [21], on the other hand, utilized one clinician to acquire the image and a second to assess the image, and Liu et al. [57] blinded the assessors to the velocity readouts on the elastogram. Blinding the image assessor is recommended for future studies to reduce the risk of the      clinical presentation.Future research
Further studies are suggested to evaluate the number of images required to provide repro-ducible data. Various studies reported taking between 3-5 scans in a single evaluation then using either the 'best scan' or an average of the measurements to include in their analysis. However, none of the studies reported the degree of variance between the repeated scans. The degree of variance during multiple evaluations within a single session is an impor-tant calculation, to determine the degree of acceptable variance using the equipment. If the degree of variation in measurement is greater than the clinically important changes, then the average value may not be appropriate to use. However, if the variation is small, only -cantly reduce the time burden of image acquisi-tion and analysis. In addition, further research is required to investigate potential artifacts      shear wave speeds.Ultrasound elastography in dermatology
Limitations of the systematic reviewThis research was limited to published ab- stracts and studies conducted on cutaneous and subcutaneous-adipose conditions. How- ever, many studies conducted do not result in publication [77], therefore additional unpub-lished research may have been conducted yielding results contrary to that presented in this study. In addition, research methodologies conducted in other tissue, organ or diagnostic groups could generate high quality methodolo-gies suitable for the application in cutaneous research, which has been unexplored in this review. Furthermore, only currently available commercialized UE systems were included in the study to allow imminent application in burns research. However, technology is developing at a rapid pace, therefore studies conducted using prototypes of new elastography systems may also yield further evidence of validity and/or reliability. Finally, elastography is also avail-able on platforms other than ultrasound, includ-ing optical imaging and magnetic resonance imaging, which may also provide other suitable options for imaging the mechanical properties of cutaneous conditions. Conclusionindicators support the conduct of further stud-ies in cutaneous imaging.Brendan Kennedy is a founder and shareholder in OncoRes Medical (Perth, Western Australia, Australia), a start-up company developing opti-cal-based elastography for surgical applica-tions. In addition, he performs funded research for this company.Address correspondence to: Helen M DeJong, Perth Scar and Pain Clinic, Mount Pleasant, Unit 6/17 Ogilvie Road, Western Australia, 6153, Australia. Tel: +61 414 827 508; E-mail: References[1] Doherty JR, Trahey GE, Nightingale KR and Palmeri ML. Acoustic radiation force elasticity imaging in diagnostic ultrasound. IEEE Trans Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control 2013; 60: 685-701.
I, Wilson SR, Cosgrove D, Dietrich CF, Amy D, Bamber JC, Barr R, Chou YH, Ding H, Farrokh A, Friedrich-Rust M, Hall TJ, Nakashima K, Night-ingale KR, Palmeri ML, Schafer F, Shiina T, Su-zuki S and Kudo M. WFUMB guidelines and recommendations for clinical use of ultra-sound elastography: Part 3: liver. Ultrasound Med Biol 2015; 41: 1161-1179.[26] Jeong WK, Lim HK, Lee HK, Jo JM and Kim Y. Principles and clinical application of ultra-sound elastography for diffuse liver disease. Ultrasonography 2014; 33: 149.[27] Park GY and Kwon DR. Application of real-time sonoelastography in musculoskeletal diseases related to physical medicine and rehabilita-tion. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2011; 90: 875-886.[28] Chimenti R, Flemister A, Ketz J, Bucklin M, Buckley M and Richards M. Ultrasound strain mapping of achilles tendon compressive strain [29] Garra BS. Tissue elasticity imaging using ultra-sound. Appl Radiol 2011; 40: 24.[30] Cannao PM, Vinci V, Caviggioli F, Klinger M, Or-LM. Technical feasibility of real-time elastogra-phy to assess the peri-oral region in patients affected by systemic sclerosis. J Ultrasound 2014; 17: 265-269.Ultrasound elastography in dermatology[31] Barr RG, Nakashima K, Amy D, Cosgrove D, Farrokh A, Schafer F, Bamber JC, Castera L, Choi BI, Chou YH, Dietrich CF, Ding H, Ferraioli G, Filice C, Friedrich-Rust M, Hall TJ, Nightin-gale KR, Palmeri ML, Shiina T, Suzuki S, Sporea I, Wilson S, Kudo M. WFUMB guidelines and recommendations for clinical use of ultra-sound elastography: Part 2: breast. Ultrasound Med Biol 2015; 41: 1148-1160.[32] Stachs A, Hartmann S, Stubert J, Dieterich M, Martin A, Kundt G, Reimer T and Gerber B. Dif-ferentiating between malignant and benign breast masses: factors limiting sonoelasto-graphic strain ratio. Ultraschall Med 2013; 34: 131-136.
SC, Lenghel LM, Rogojan L, Dudea SM. Assess-ment of cutaneous melanoma by use of very-high-frequency ultrasound and real-time elas-tography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2016; 206: 699-704.[34] Suehiro K, Morikage N, Murakami M, Yamashi-ta O, Harada T, Ueda K, Samura M, Tanaka Y, Nakamura K and Hamano K. Skin and subcu-taneous tissue strain in legs with lymphedema and lipodermatosclerosis. Ultrasound Med Biol 2015; 41: 1577-1583.[35] Yun Lee S, Cardones A, Doherty J, Nightingale K and Palmeri M. Preliminary results on the feasibility of using ARFI/SWEI To assess cuta-neous sclerotic diseases. Ultrasound Med Biol 2015; 41: 2806-2819.[36] Dillman JR, Chen S, Davenport MS, Zhao H, Ur-ban MW, Song P, Watcharotone K and Carson      measurements in soft and hard elasticity phantoms: repeatability and reproducibility us-ing two ultrasound systems. Pediatr Radiol 2015; 45: 376-385.[37] McHugh AA, Fowlkes BJ, Maevsky EI, Smith DJ Jr, Rodriguez JL and Garner WL. Biomechanical alterations in normal skin and hypertrophic scar after thermal injury. J Burn Care Rehabil 1997; 18: 104-108.[38] Hou Y, Zhu QL, Liu H, Jiang YX, Wang L, Xu D, Li MT, Zeng XF and Zhang FC. A preliminary study -tion for the assessment of skin in diffuse cuta-neous systemic sclerosis. J Rheumatol 2015; 42: 449-455.[39] Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, Mulrow C, Gotzsche PC, Ioannidis JP, Clarke M, Devereaux PJ, Kleijnen J and Moher D. The PRISMA state-ment for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elabora-tion. PLoS Med 2009; 6: e1000100.[40] Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG and Group P. Preferred reporting items for system-atic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med 2009; 6: e1000097.[41] Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, Mallett 
JA and Bossuyt PM. QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accu-racy studies. Ann Intern Med 2011; 155: 529-536.[42] Lucas NP, Macaskill P, Irwig L and Bogduk N. The development of a quality appraisal tool for studies of diagnostic reliability (QAREL). J Clin Epidemiol 2010; 63: 854-861.[43] [44] Di Geso L, Filippucci E, Girolimetti R, Tardella         Grassi W. Reliability of ultrasound measure-ments of dermal thickness at digits in system-ic sclerosis: role of elastosonography. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2011; 29: 926-932.[45] Zheng Y, Leung S and Mak A. Assessment of -tion system: a feasibility study. Med Biol Eng Comput 2000; 38: 497-502.[46] Leung SF, Zheng Y, Choi C, Mak S and Chiu S. Quantitative measuement of post-irradiation -scription of a new method and clinical results. Cancer 2002; 95: 656-62.[47] Lau JC, Li-Tsang CW and Zheng YP. Application of tissue ultrasound palpation system (TUPS) in objective scar evaluation. Burns 2005; 31: 445-452.[48] Crisan D, Gheuca Solovastru L, Crisan M and Badea R. Cutaneous histiocytoma-histological and imaging correlations. A case report. Med Ultrason 2014; 16: 268-270.ca Solovastru L and Badea R. Integrative anal-ysis of cutaneous skin tumours using ultraso-nogaphic criteria. Preliminary results. Med Ultrason 2014; 16: 285-290.[50] Park J, Chae IS and Kwon DR. Utility of sono-
elastography in differentiating ruptured from unruptured epidermal cysts and implications for patient care. J Ultrasound Med 2015; 34: 1175-1181.[51] Osanai O, Ohtsuka M, Hotta M, Kitaharai T and Takema Y. A new method for the visualization ultrasound imaging. Skin Res Technol 2011; 17: 270-277.[52] Hata H, Natsuga K, Aoyagi S, Homma E and [54] Schmid-Wendtner MH, Hinz T, Wenzel J and Wendtner CM. Real time tissue elastography Ultrasound elastography in dermatology[55] Iagnocco A, Kaloudi O, Perella C, Bandinelli F, Riccieri V, Vasile M, Porta F, Valesini G and Matucci-Cerinic M. Ultrasound elastography assessment of skin involvement in systemic sclerosis: lights and shadows. J Rheumatol 2010; 37: 1688-1691.[56] Suehiro K, Nakamura K, Morikage N, Muraka-mi M, Yamashita O, Ueda K, Samura M and Hamano K. Real-time tissue elastography as-sessment of skin and subcutaneous tissue strains in legs with lymphedema. J Med Ultra-son (2001) 2014; 41: 359-364.[57] Liu K, Bhatia K, Chu W, He L, Leung S and Ahu-ja A. Shear wave elastography-A new quantita--sis. Ultraschall Med 2015; 36: 348-354.[58] Terwee CB, Mokkink LB, Knol DL, Ostelo RW, Bouter LM and de Vet HC. Rating the method-ological quality in systematic reviews of stud-ies on measurement properties: a scoring sys-tem for the COSMIN checklist. Qual Life Res 2012; 21: 651-657.
roll S. Objective measurement of scarring by multiple assessors: is the tissue tonometer a reliable option? J Burn Care Res 2006; 27: 520-523.[68] Lye I, Edgar DW, Wood FM and Carroll S. Tissue tonometry is a simple, objective measure for pliability of burn scar: is it reliable? J Burn Care Res 2006; 27: 82-85.[69] Ni Annaidh A, Bruyere K, Destrade M, Gilchrist MD and Ottenio M. Characterization of the anisotropic mechanical properties of excised human skin. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 2012; 5: 139-148.[70] Everett JS and Sommers MS. Skin viscoelastic-ity: physiologic mechanisms, measurement is-sues, and application to nursing science. Biol Res Nurs 2013; 15: 338-346.[71] Pierard GE. EEMCO guidance to the in vivo as-sessment of tensile functional properties of the skin. Part 1: relevance to the structures and ageing of the skin and subcutaneous tis-sues. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 1999; 12: 352-362.[72] Pailler-Mattei C, Bec S and Zahouani H. In vivo measurements of the elastic mechanical prop-erties of human skin by indentation tests. Med Eng Phys 2008; 30: 599-606.[73] Yoshitake Y, Miyamoto N, Taniguchi K, Katay-ose M and Kanehisa H. The skin acts to main-tain muscle shear modulus. Ultrasound Med Biol 2016; 42: 674-682.[74] Gurtner GC, Dauskardt RH, Wong VW, Bhatt KA, Wu K, Vial IN, Padois K, Korman JM and Longaker MT. Improving cutaneous scar forma-tion by controlling the mechanical environ-ment: large animal and phase I studies. Ann Surg 2011; 254: 217-225.[75] Wong VW, Longaker MT and Gurtner GC. Soft 
tissue mechanotransduction in wound healing        981-986.[76] Andonian P, Viallon M, Le Goff C, de Bourgui-gnon C, Tourel C, Morel J, Giardini G, Gergele L, Millet GP and Croisille P. Shear-wave elastogra-phy assessments of quadriceps stiffness changes prior to, during and after prolonged exercise: a longitudinal study during an ex-treme mountain ultra-marathon. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0161855.[77] Drucker AM, Fleming P and Chan AW. Research techniques made simple: assessing risk of bias in systematic reviews. J Invest Dermatol 2016; 136: e109-e114.
