 CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................15Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1 Metronidazole versus Placebo, Outcome 1 Malodour (Smell Score)....................................................17CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................22DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................22SOURCES OF SUPPORT...............................................................................................................................................................................23DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................23CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds
Darshini A Ramasubbu1, Valerie Smith2, Fiona Hayden3, Patricia Cronin21Dental Department, HSE, Dublin, Ireland. 2School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 3CommunityPharmacy, Lloyd's Pharmacy, Dublin, IrelandContact: Darshini A Ramasubbu, Dental Department, HSE, Kilbarrack Dental Clinic, Foxfield Crescent, Dublin, D5, Editorial group: Cochrane Wounds Group.Publication status and date: New, published in Issue 8, 2017.Citation:  Ramasubbu DA, Smith V, Hayden F, Cronin P. Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2017, Issue 8. Art. No.: CD011609. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011609.pub2.Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TMalignant wounds are a devastating complication of cancer. They usually develop in the last six months of life, in the breast, chestwall or head and neck regions. They are very dificult to treat successfully, and the commonly associated symptoms of pain, exudate,malodour, and the risk of haemorrhage are extremely distressing for those with advanced cancer. Treatment and care of malignant woundsis primarily palliative, and focuses on alleviating pain, controlling infection and odour from the wound, managing exudate and protectingthe surrounding skin from further deterioration. In malignant wounds, with tissue degradation and death, there is proliferation of bothanaerobic and aerobic bacteria. The aim of antibiotic therapy is to successfully eliminate these bacteria, reduce associated symptoms,such as odour, and promote wound healing.
ObjectivesTo assess the efects of systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds.We searched the following electronic databases on 8 March 2017: the Cochrane Wounds Specialised Register, the Cochrane Central Registerof Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; the Cochrane Library, 2017, Issue 3), Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase and EBSCO CINAHL Plus. We also searchedthe clinical trial registries of the World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (apps.who.int/trialsearch)and ClinicalTrials.gov on 20 March 2017; and OpenSIGLE (to identify grey literature) and ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global (to retrievedissertation theses related to our topic of interest) on 13 March 2017.Selection criteriaRandomised controlled trials that assessed the efects of any systemic antibiotics on malignant wounds were eligible for inclusion.Two review authors independently screened and selected trials for inclusion, assessed risk of bias and extracted study data. A third reviewerchecked extracted data for accuracy prior to analysis.Main resultsWe identified only one study for inclusion in this review. This study was a prospective, double-blind cross-over trial that compared theefect of systemic metronidazole with a placebo on odour in malignant wounds. Nine participants with a fungating wound and for whomthe smell was troublesome were recruited and six of these completed both the intervention and control (placebo) stages of the trial. Eachstage lasted fourteen days, with a fourteen day gap (washout period) between administration of the metronidazole and the placebo.
Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsThe study, in comparing metronidazole and placebo, reported on two of this review's pre-specified primary outcomes (malodour andadverse efects of the treatment) and on none of the review's pre-specified secondary outcomes.The mean malodour (smell) scores for the metronidazole group was 1.17 (standard deviation (SD) 1.60) and the mean for the placebo groupwas 3.33 (SD 0.82). It is unclear if systemic antibiotics were associated with a diference in malodour (1 study with 6 participants; MD --2.16,95% CI --3.6 to --0.72) as the quality of the evidence (GRADE) was very low for this outcome. The study was downgraded due to high riskof attrition bias (33% loss to follow-up) and very serious imprecision due to the small sample size.Adverse efects
No adverse efects of the treatment were reported in either the intervention or control group by the trial authors.Authors' conclusionsIt is uncertain whether systemic metronidazole leads to a reduction in malodour in patients with malignant wounds. This is because wewere only able to include a single study at high risk of bias with a very small sample size, which focused only on patients with breast cancer.More research is needed to substantiate these findings and to investigate the efects of systemic metronidazole and other antibiotics onquality of life, pain relief, exudate and tumour containment in patients with malignant wounds.P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YReview questionWe reviewed the evidence about the efect of systemic antibiotics on malignant wounds. We were looking for evidence relating to possibleside efects of this treatment, and the impact on quality of life and other symptoms.BackgroundMalignant wounds occur in people who have advanced cancer. They usually develop in the last six months of life, at or near the site of atumour. They occur when a tumour spreads and invades surrounding skin and blood vessels, causing them to break down. The area losesnourishment due to poor blood flow, and eventually the tissues die, resulting in a malignant wound. This type of wound can be very painful,can smell, and can bleed or ooze fluid. These symptoms can be very dificult for people with advanced cancer. Treatment for malignantwounds does not normally aim to heal the wound, but to limit symptoms that afect people's quality of life.
Antibiotics are medicines that fight bacterial infections. Systemic antibiotics afect the whole body. They can be given by mouth in tabletform, or in other ways such as via injections. We looked for evidence as to whether systemic antibiotics can prevent malignant woundsfrom getting worse, and help reduce the smell, pain and other complications associated with these wounds.Study characteristicsIn March 2017 we searched for randomised controlled trials looking at the efects of systemic antibiotics on malignant wounds. We foundonly one trial, dating from 1984, which compared the efectiveness of the antibiotic metronidazole with a placebo (sugar pill) on sixparticipants with malignant wounds resulting from breast cancer. The trial was a cross-over trial which means that participants receiveboth the treatment being tested and the comparison treatment, at diferent time-points, with a break between the treatments to ensurethat the efects of the first treatment have worn of before the second treatment is taken. This is called the 'washout' period. In the onetrial in this review, half the participants took the antibiotic first, for 14 days, and half took the placebo. Both groups then had 14 days withno medication before swapping over (cross-over) and trying the alternative treatment for 14 days.Key results
It is unclear if metronidazole reduces the smell of malignant wounds when taken orally (by mouth) in tablet form, without any side efectsoccurring. Its efectiveness in relation to other outcomes such as pain or quality of life was not measured in this trial. No change in the sizeor appearance of participants' tumours was reported.It is uncertain whether metronidazole reduces the smell of malignant wounds when taken orally in tablet form because the quality of theevidence is very low. This evidence came from a very small study with serious study design flaws, and more research is needed involvingmore people with diferent types of cancer. Trials looking at how antibiotics can afect other outcomes, such as quality of life, pain reliefand reducing any bleeding or ooze from the wound are also needed.This plain language summary is up to date as of March 2017.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings for the main comparison.   Metronidazole compared to Placebo for treating malignant woundsMetronidazole compared to Placebo for treating malignant woundsPatient or population: treating malignant woundsSetting: hospitalIntervention: metronidazoleComparison: placeboAnticipated absolute effects* (95% CI)OutcomesRisk with PlaceboRisk with Metronida-zoleRelative effect(95% CI)No.  of partici-pants(studies)Quality of theevidence(GRADE)CommentsThe mean malodour(smell score) was 3.33(range 2.0 to 4.0)
MD 2.16 lower(3.60 to 0.72 lower)-6(1 RCT)very low 1It is uncertain whethermetronidazole leads to areduction in malodour be-cause the quality of the evi-dence is very lowStudy populationAdverse effectsnot estimable6(1 RCT)NA *The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% CI) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). CI:confidence interval; RR: risk ratio; MD: mean difference.GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High quality: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.Moderate quality: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is sub-stantially different.Low quality: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.Very low quality: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.1 Downgraded 3 levels: serious limitation -- insuficient details provided to make clear judgements on random sequence generation and allocation concealment. There was alsoa 33% loss to follow-up; very serious imprecision; a small sample size of 6 participants.2 Smell was independently assessed at each visit by the patient, doctor, and nurse, who graded the smell as "absent" (0), "not ofensive" (1), "ofensive but tolerable" (2), or"ofensive and intolerable" (3), and an amalgamated score calculated. LibraryBetter health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsB A C K G R O U N DDescription of the conditionMalignant wounds, which are also referred to as fungating wounds,ulcerating tumours or neoplastic (new growth) lesions (Adderley2014), are a devastating complication of cancer that most ofenarises in the last six months of life (McDonald 2006). These woundsarise when tumour cells infiltrate the skin and its blood and lymphvessels from a local or distant primary tumour. Carcinomas of thebreast in women and lung cancer in men are the most commonsources of primary tumours that lead to these cutaneous (skin)metastases. They are also caused by primary cutaneous tumours,or by direct invasion of a primary tumour into the cutaneousstructure (Alexander 2009). Globally, malignant wounds occur mostfrequently on the breast or chest wall (39% to 62%), with head andneck (24% to 33.8%), back, trunk or abdomen (1% to 3%), axillaor groin (3% to 7%) and genitals (3% to 5%) also being commonsites (McDonald 2006). Although accurate statistics on, or reportsof, their prevalence are not available, it is estimated that malignantwounds are present in 5% to 10% of people with cancer (Seaman2006).Malignant wounds present a particularly challenging clinicalscenario, as they are very dificult to treat successfully. Alexander2009 claims that reports of healed malignant wounds are very rare.In addition, the commonly associated symptoms of pain, copiousexudate, malodour, and the risk of haemorrhage are extremelydistressing for people with advanced cancer.
Initial presentation varies depending on whether tumour invasionis as a result of the extension of a local tumour to the skinsurface or as a metastasis (spread) of a primary tumour. In theformer, inflammation with induration (hardening), and redness ortenderness -- or both -- may be present. When skin is afectedas a result of metastasis, well-defined nodules that vary in size,colour and consistency but are generally painless, become visible.These nodules may be fixed to underlying tissue. In both cases, asthe tumour spreads and extends above the skin surface, furthertissue destruction occurs. The wound takes on an erosive andulcerative appearance, or a fungus/cauliflower-like appearance, orboth (McDonald 2006). These wounds are thought to interfere withoxygenation of the tissues, lymphatic drainage and haemostasis(maintenance of the healthy state of tissue). Tissue hypoxia (lowoxygen levels) leads to lack of oxygen in the local cells, whichsometimes leads to cell death (Adderley 2014; Mortimer 2003). Theresulting wound bed can vary in colour from pale to pink, with thetissue being very friable (easily torn, fragmented or made to bleed)or necrotic (dead cells or tissue), or a combination of both (Seaman2006). The surrounding skin can be macerated (i.e. sofened andbroken down due to prolonged exposure to wetness), fragile andvery tender to the touch.
The necrotic tissue of the wound bed becomes an ideal medium foranaerobic bacteria, which grow and flourish in areas of low oxygenconcentrations. Their metabolic activities may account, in part, forthe odour that patients find extremely distressing. Cell growth inmalignant wounds can be very rapid and may afect the pH ofextracellular fluid (Adderley 2014). This interferes with coagulationof blood, and vessel occlusion and necrosis may result. Disruptionof the lymphatic system can lead to vascular collapse, hypoxia,necrosis, build-up of waste and oedema (fluid retention). Excessivewound exudate, which can amount to over a litre per day in someUnless the underlying malignancy can be treated efectively,medically or surgically, the fungation in a malignant wound willcontinue to grow; and, through loss of vascularity, proliferativegrowth and ulceration, further damage to the surrounding skinoccurs (EONS 2015). Wound-related symptoms commonly includeodour, haemorrhage, pain and exudate, with odour, pain andexudate, in particular, presenting significant challenges for woundmanagement (Gethin 2014). Care and treatment of these woundsis primarily palliative, with care and management focusing onproblem solving to control and reduce the overall impact ofwound symptoms and provision of physical, psychosocial andpsychological support to patients and their families (EONS 2015).There is currently a lack of evidence, overall, to direct the clinicalmanagement of wound odour and local colonisation, with a'trial and error' approach most frequently adopted (Gethin 2014).Nonetheless, a recent publication by the European OncologyNursing Society recommends that wound cleansing and irrigation,debridement (non-surgical), metronidazole topically or orally,activated charcoal and antimicrobial (silver) dressings, frequentdressing changes (twice a day) and the use of opiates forpain management can help with efectively managing the mostdistressing symptoms (EONS 2015).
Description of the interventionAntibiotics are agents that are used to kill or prevent the growthof disease-causing micro-organisms without causing damage tothe host (patient). This selective toxicity depends on targetingdiferences between the host cell and that of the infecting micro-organism. While the term 'micro-organisms' includes bacteria,viruses and fungi, bacteria account for most infectious disease.Most antibiotics work by exploiting diferences between bacterialand host cells -- such as synthesis of proteins, DNA, RNA(ribonucleic acid), and peptidoglycan in bacterial cell walls (Rang2003).
Systemic antibiotics, which afect the whole body, can be used toimprove symptom management, reduce further deterioration andimprove quality of life for those with malignant wounds (Alexander2009). Systemic administration of antibiotic agents, rather thantopical (surface) application to the infected area, can take placethrough a variety of routes. The route selected for systemicadministration depends on factors relating to the infection, drugsand the patient.Systemic antibiotics can be administered orally, rectally,transdermally (through the skin), sublingually (under the tongue)and via the buccal route (between gums and inner face of thecheek). In addition they can be delivered parenterally directly intoveins, muscles and joints (intravenous, intramuscular and intra-articular routes, respectively). Topical antibiotics are applied tothe wound site, acting directly on the site of application. Thususe of topical antibiotics will not lead to blood or tissue drugconcentration levels. In this sense, topical agents are 'surface'agents rather than systemic agents. Transdermal antibiotics areapplied to intact skin away from the wound site, and are absorbedinto the body through the skin and mucous membranes, leadingto drug levels in circulating blood. They are intended to act onan area of the body away from the site of application. The mostcommon routes of administration for systemic antibiotics are theSystemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsoral, intravenous, intramuscular and rectal routes. The oral routeis suitable for well-absorbed drugs, and is generally used for lesssevere infections; it is suitable if the patient can swallow and has novomiting, nausea or gastrointestinal contraindications (conditionsthat would make the drug or route unsuitable). Generally, moresevere infections require intravenous treatment. The intravenousroute is also used if the drug is poorly absorbed when taken orally.If a patient cannot swallow or is vomiting, then parenteral or rectalroutes of administration may be more suitable (British NationalFormulary 2017).
How the intervention might workIn malignant wounds, tissue degradation can lead to proliferationof both anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. Successful eliminationof bacteria may reduce associated symptoms, such as odour,and promote wound healing. Antibiotics may be described asbacteriostatic (halting the growth of bacteria) or bactericidal (toxicto bacteria). Antibiotics achieve this efect by exploiting diferencesbetween the structure and biochemistry of microbial cells andhuman cells.Anaerobic proliferation (rapid increase in bacteria that do notgrow or live when oxygen is present) is common in malignantwounds and, although many antibiotics target anaerobic bacteria,metronidazole -- a bactericidal antibiotic -- is the most commonlyused topical antibiotic for these wounds. It may also be usedsystemically against these bacteria, and appears to be the antibioticof choice. When given systemically, it is reduced to its active form,which binds to bacterial DNA, inactivating it and preventing DNAsynthesis. Metronidazole is highly active against anaerobic bacteria(Lofmark 2010), the growth of which may be facilitated by tissuehypoxia (deficiency in oxygen) in wounds. Metronidazole is usedsystemically by the oral, intravenous and rectal routes. Adversereactions to metronidazole include nausea, vomiting, anorexia(loss of appetite) and oral mucositis (inflammation of the lining ofthe digestive tract). It interacts with other drugs including alcohol,warfarin and phenytoin. It should be used with caution in thosewith hepatic impairment (British National Formulary 2017). Otherantibiotics may also be used systemically, depending on the type ofbacteria present in the wound.In malignant wounds, loss of vascularity (blood supply) andsubsequent necrosis (death of the tissue) caused by tumourinvasion may compromise the distribution, penetration andeficacy of systemic antibiotics such as metronidazole (Grocott2001a).
Why it is important to do this reviewA Cochrane Review on malignant wounds, titled 'Topical agents anddressings for fungating wounds', concluded that there was weakevidence to suggest that a 6% solution of miltefosine might slowprogression of small, superficial fungating wounds on the breast,but that ultimately more research was needed in this area (Adderley2014). Systemic treatments for malignant wounds have focused onvarious regimens of antibiotics, primarily metronidazole, aimed atslowing disease progression, alleviating symptoms and optimisingthe quality of life of the patient. We hoped that this review wouldexpand the current evidence base regarding treatment optionsand, ideally, contribute to clinical decision making for those withmalignant wounds and potentially identify the most efectivetreatment and management regime.O B J E C T I V E STo assess the efects of systemic antibiotics for treating malignantwounds.M E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesRandomised controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed the efectsof systemic antibiotics on malignant wounds were eligible forinclusion. In the absence of RCTs, we would have consideredincluding controlled clinical trials (CCTs) that assessed the efectsof systemic antibiotics in the treatment of malignant wounds, witha concurrent control group and prospective baseline assessmentof the malignant wound in the review, but no eligible CCTs wereidentified.
Types of participantsStudies involving people of any age with a clinically diagnosedmalignant wound resulting from any type of cancer were eligiblefor inclusion. Where diferences in the definitions of a malignantwound existed, we accepted the study authors' diagnosis asdefinitive.Types of interventionsStudies evaluating the efects of any systemic antibiotic usedin the treatment of any type of malignant wound were eligiblefor inclusion. This would have involved including studies thatcompared systemic antibiotics with a placebo, no treatment, ora topical antibiotic; and studies that compared one systemicantibiotic with another systemic antibiotic.Types of outcome measures*Malodour (measured by a validated assessment tool, e.g.the TELER system (Grocott 2001b) which assesses malignantwounds using a 0 to 5 ordinal scale on a number of indicators, forexample skin condition, wound exudate and odour. For odour, ascore of 0 indicates odour that is obvious in the house/hospitalward. A score of 5 indicates no odour).*Adverse efects of treatment (e.g. nausea, vomiting, rash or anyother adverse efect as reported by the trial authors).*Health-related quality of life (measured using a standardisedgeneric questionnaire such as EQ-5D (Brooks 1996), SF-36(Jenkinson 1996), or a disease-specific questionnaire).*Exudate/haemorrhage (number of dressing changes).*Pain relief (measured using visual analogue scale or othervalidated pain-measuring scale).*Cost (including measurements of resource use, where reported).*Malignant tumour containment or regression as measured bytime to progression (WHO 1979).Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsElectronic searchesWe searched the following electronic databases to identify reportsof relevant clinical trials:*the Cochrane Wounds Specialised Register (searched 8 March2017);*the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL;2017, Issue 3) in the Cochrane Library (searched 8 March 2017);*MEDLINE Ovid including In-Process & Other Non-IndexedCitations (1946 to 8 March 2017);*Embase Ovid (1974 to 8 March 2017);*CINAHL EBSCO Plus (Cumulative Index to Nursing and AlliedHealth Literature; 1937 to 8 March 2017).The search strategies for the Cochrane Wounds SpecialisedRegister, CENTRAL, Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase and EBSCOCINAHL Plus can be found in Appendix 1. We combined theOvid MEDLINE search with the Cochrane Highly Sensitive SearchStrategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity-and precision-maximising version (2008 revision) (Lefebvre 2011).We combined the Embase search with the Ovid Embase filterdeveloped by the UK Cochrane Centre (Lefebvre 2011). Wecombined the CINAHL searches with the trial filters developed bythe Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN 2017). Therewere no restrictions with respect to language, date of publicationor study setting. We also searched the following clinical trialsregistries:
*ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov) (searched 20 March2017);*World Health Organization (WHO) International ClinicalTrials Registry Platform ( (searched 20 March 2017).Search strategies for clinical trial registries can be found inAppendix 1.Searching other resourcesWe reviewed the reference lists of all included papers to identifyany additional potentially eligible studies that were not capturedby the electronic searches as well as relevant systematic reviews,meta-analyses and Health Technology Assessment reports. Wesearched the OpenSIGLE database to identify grey literatureand the ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global database toretrieve dissertation theses related to our topic of interest. Wealso contacted experts in the field to identify any unpublishedstudies. We searched for conference abstracts or publicationsfrom the European Wound Management Association (1991 to2016), the European Wound Management Association Journalsince its inception in 2001, the Wound Care UK (www.wounds-uk.com) website and journal (2005 to 2016) and the InternationalConference on Wound Management (1999 to 2016).Data collection and analysisWe carried out data collection and analysis according to methodsstated in the published protocol (Ramasubbu 2015), which arebased on methods described in the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011a).Selection of studiesIndependently, two review authors (DR and PC) assessed the titlesand abstracts of citations identified by the search strategy. Thereview authors were not blinded to the study authors or to thename of the publication. Full reports of all potentially relevantstudies were retrieved for further assessment of eligibility basedon the inclusion criteria. Had any disagreements occurred, we hadplanned to resolve them through discussion and consensus, or,where necessary, in consultation with a third review author (VS);however, this was not required.
Data extraction and managementTwo review authors (DR and PC) extracted data independentlyusing a pre-designed agreed data extraction form. A third reviewauthor (VS) checked the extracted data for accuracy. Whereinformation regarding data was unclear (one study), we contactedthe lead author of the original trial report for further details;however, we did not receive a response.Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesIndependently, two review authors (DR and PC) assessed riskof bias using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane Handbookfor Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011b). This tooladdresses six specific domains, namely sequence generation,allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data,selective outcome reporting and other biases (e.g. extreme baselineimbalance; see Appendix 2 for details of criteria on which thejudgement was based). Blinding and completeness of outcomedata were assessed for each outcome separately. We completeda 'Risk of bias' table for the included study. We had planned todiscuss any disagreements amongst all review authors to achieve aconsensus should they have arisen; however, this was not required.We present the assessment of risk of bias using a 'Risk of bias'summary figure that presents the judgements for each risk of biascriterion.Measures of treatment efectDichotomous dataFor dichotomous data, (e.g. specific adverse events that are presentor absent), we planned to present the results as summary risk ratio(RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).Continuous data
For continuous data, we present the results as mean diference (MD)with 95% CI. When pooling data across studies, we had planned toestimate the MD if the outcome(s) were measured in the same waybetween trials, and use the standardised mean diference (SMD) tocombine trials that measured the same outcome, but used diferentmethods. However, as only one trial was included in the review, thiswas not applicable.Time-to-event dataFor time-to-event data such as time to wound progression, we hadplanned to use methods of survival analysis and present the resultsas a hazard ratio (HR) with 95% CI. As time-to-event data werenot reported in the one included study in the review, this was notapplicable.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Unit of analysis issuesMultiple ulcers in the same participantWhere included studies evaluated the efect of the treatment onmultiple ulcers in the same participant we had planned to seekfurther statistical advice on how to handle and analyse these data;or, where we were unable to include these data in a meta-analysis,we would have reported the results using narrative synthesis. Asone trial only was included in the review and focused on one woundper participant only, this was not applicable. We will consider thisin future updates of the review, if indicated.Dealing with missing dataWe noted the levels of attrition for the included study. Usingsensitivity analysis, we had planned to explore the impact ofincluding studies with high levels of missing data in the overallassessment of treatment efect. For all outcomes we plannedto carry out analyses as far as possible on an intention-to-treatbasis. For dichotomous data, where participant outcome data weremissing, we had planned to make an assumption that the outcomeconcerned was likely not to have occurred. For continuous outcomedata (e.g. quality of life), the denominator for each outcome ineach trial would have been the number randomised minus anyparticipants whose outcomes were known to be missing; we hadplanned to use the numbers reported in the study. Dealing withmissing data was not necessary in the review; we will consider this,if indicated, in future updates.Assessment of heterogeneityHad more than one study been included in this review, we wouldhave assessed statistical heterogeneity in each meta-analysis,where performed, using the I2 statistic (Higgins 2011b). We plannedto interpret the I2 statistic according to the following thresholds:*0% to 40%: might not be important;*40% to 60%: may represent moderate heterogeneity;*more than 60%: may represent substantial heterogeneity.
We will apply this interpretation to future updates shouldadditional studies be included in future meta-analyses.We had planned to explore identified heterogeneity visually usingforest plots and analytically using sub-group analyses (e.g. forclinical variation such as type of cancer) and random-efects meta-analyses; we will apply this, if indicated, in future updates.Assessment of reporting biasesTo address the potential for publication of positive, statisticallysignificant results, we searched the grey literature comprehensivelyfor unpublished data; however, no additional unpublished studiesmeeting the review's inclusion criteria were found. Had data fromunpublished studies been identified, we would have included thisdata cautiously, recognising unpublished reports as a possiblesource of bias, and would have contacted the original trialists forfurther information as necessary; we will consider this, if indicated,in future updates.Data synthesisWe carried out statistical analysis using Review Manager 5 sofware(Review Manager 2014). Had more than one study been included inthe review, we would have synthesised data only where we thoughtit was appropriate to do so, that is where trials were examiningsimilar interventions, with similar populations and methods. Wewould have used a fixed-efect approach for combining data whereit was reasonable to assume that studies were estimating the sameunderlying treatment efect: that is where trials were examining thesame intervention, and the trials' populations and methods weresuficiently similar. Where there was clinical or methodologicalheterogeneity between studies suficient to suggest that treatmentefects may have difered between trials, random-efects meta-analysis would have been used; we will apply this data synthesisplan to future updates.Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
If suficient studies on diverse populations had been identifiedas eligible for inclusion, we would have attempted to conductthe following subgroup analyses for systematic antibiotics formalignant wounds according to:*organ afected by cancer;*drug used;*dose of drug;*duration of treatment with drug.We will continue to consider these subgroup analyses in futureupdates.Sensitivity analysisHad more than one study been included in the review, we wouldhave carried out sensitivity analyses to explore whether analysingstudies stratified by quality (low risk of bias and high risk of bias)produces similar or diferent results. We would have carried out asensitivity analysis by excluding those studies at an overall high riskof bias from the meta-analysis (as defined in Assessment of risk ofbias in included studies); we will consider this analysis, if indicated,in future updates.'Summary of findings' tablesWe assessed the quality of the results for the primary outcomesof the review in a 'Summary of findings' table (Summary offindings for the main comparison). A 'Summary of findings' tablepresents key information concerning the quality of the evidence,the magnitude of the efects of the interventions examined andthe sum of available data for the main outcomes (Schunemann2011a). The 'Summary of findings' table also includes an overallgrading of the evidence related to each of the main outcomes usingthe GRADE approach. The GRADE approach defines the quality ofa body of evidence as the extent to which one can be confidentthat an estimate of efect or association is close to the true quantityof specific interest. The quality of a body of evidence involvesconsideration of within-trial risk of bias (methodological quality),directness of evidence, heterogeneity, precision of efect estimatesand risk of publication bias (Schunemann 2011b). We presented thefollowing outcomes in the 'Summary of findings' table:*malodour*adverse efects of the treatment.
Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E S U L T SDescription of studiesSee Characteristics of included studies tableResults of the searchThe search yielded a total of 470 citations (467 from databasesearching and 3 from searching of additional sources), of which 415were excluded on the basis of title or title and abstract as they didnot investigate the use of systemic antibiotics in the treatment ofmalignant wounds (Figure 1). This resulted in the retrieval of fivefull-text reports for possible inclusion in the review (Ashford 1984;Dankert 1981; De Castro 2015; McGregor 1982; Sparrow 1980). Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsIncluded studiesOne study only met the inclusion criteria (Ashford 1984). This studywas a prospective, double-blind cross-over trial that comparedthe efect of systemic metronidazole with a placebo on odour inmalignant wounds. Nine participants with a fungating wound andfor whom the smell was troublesome were recruited and six ofthese completed both the intervention and control (placebo) stagesof the trial. Each stage lasted fourteen days, with a fourteen daygap (washout period) between administration of the metronidazoleand the placebo. Swabs of the tumour were taken before andafer each treatment stage, and tumour odour was assessedindependently by the participant, a doctor and a nurse using anordinal grading scale of 0 (no smell) to 3 (ofensive and intolerable).All of the six participants that completed the trial stages hadrecurrent breast cancer and completed the trial with little changein tumour appearance, but had a reduction in malodour and
anaerobic (in the absence of air) isolates (level of bacteria that grewin a laboratory test from a swab of the wound). Although it is notentirely clear where the research took place, the researchers, whowere clinical oncologists, worked in a hospital in London at the timeof the study. Details of study funding are also not provided in thestudy report; however, it is noted that the placebo was provided bya pharmaceutical company.Excluded studiesThree studies were excluded as they were not RCTs or CCTs (Dankert1981; De Castro 2015; Sparrow 1980); and one study was excludedas it evaluated treatment of surgical rather than malignant wounds(McGregor 1982). See Characteristics of excluded studies table.Risk of bias in included studiesThe included study had high risk of bias. See Figure 2, Figure 3. Figure 2.   Risk of bias graph: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item presented as percentagesacross all included studies.  Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews AllocationThe included study was described as a cross-over, double-blindrandomised trial (Ashford 1984). The authors did not report themethod of allocation concealment or how the randomisationsequence was generated, and the trial was assessed as unclear riskof bias on allocation.The trial was described as double blind, whereby both participantsand personnel were blind to the intervention and control throughthe use of 'identical tablets'.Three participants withdrew from the study. The reasons forwithdrawal are provided by the authors in the study report: oneparticipant died; a second required antibiotics for septicaemia;and a third responded unexpectedly to radiotherapy. This loss ofthree participants represents a loss of one-third of the total studyparticipants, with six only remaining for data analysis. For thisreason, other potential sources of bias were assessed as high riskof bias.Trial registration was not available and because the outcomes ofinterest were not clearly specified, only inferred, we assessed therisk of bias for selective reporting as unclear.Other potential sources of biasThe cross-over design was considered suitable because of thedificulty of recruitment in this population. The wash-out period of14 days was deemed appropriate to eliminate the carry-over efectand was not considered a potential source of bias in the study.Data from the six patients who completed both arms of the trialwere presented.The analysis of the available data was appropriate given that smellscores were available for each patient in each arm of the trial.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsEfects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings for the main comparisonMetronidazole compared to Placebo for treating malignant woundsThe results are reported with reference to the review's pre-specifiedoutcome measures.Metronidazole versus placeboMalodourIt is unclear if systemic antibiotics are associated with a diferencein malodour (MD --2.16, 95% CI --3.60 to --0.72, 1 study, 6participants, see (Figure 4)). Malodour (smell scores) was gradedon a 0 to 3 scale with higher values indicating a more ofensiveand intolerable smell. The mean smell scores for the metronidazolegroup was 1.17 (SD 1.60) and the mean for the placebo group was3.33 (SD 0.82). The results for all six participants from both phasesof the cross-over trial were included in the analysis, rather thanthe results from the first treatment phase only. We did this becauseonly one study was included, the numbers of participants weresmall, and the washout period of 14 days was considered clinicallysuficient to eliminate any potential efects from 'carry-over'. Thequality of the evidence (GRADE) was assessed as very low for thisoutcome (Summary of findings for the main comparison). Figure 4.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 Metronidazole versus Placebo, outcome: 1.1 Malodour (Smell Score). Adverse efectsNo adverse efects of the treatment were reported in either theintervention or control group by the trial authors.The one included study did not report on any of the review'spre-specified secondary outcomes of health-related quality of life,pain, exudate/haemorrhage (number of dressing changes), cost, ormalignant tumour containment or regression.D I S C U S S I O NSummary of main results
Overall, the results of this review highlight the lack of researchin this area with very little evidence to direct clinical practicein the treatment of fungating malignant wounds with systemicantibiotics. We identified only one study that met the inclusioncriteria for the review, and very few participants (six) were includedin this study (Ashford 1984). Due to the very low quality evidenceon the primary outcome of malodour, it is uncertain whethersystematic metronidazole leads to a reduction in malodour whencompared to the use of a placebo. No adverse outcomes of thetreatment were reported in either of the groups by the trial authors.Overall completeness and applicability of evidenceThe evidence presented by the one included study is directlyrelevant to the review question as it addressed the use ofsystemic antibiotics in the treatment of malignant wounds. Thestudy compared metronidazole with a placebo. Metronidazoleis the antibiotic of choice for targeting the anaerobic bacteriacommonly found in malignant wounds. The participants hadmalignant wounds associated with recurrent breast cancer, withthis type of cancer being most commonly associated with thedevelopment of malignant wounds. Moreover, the study addressedthe review's primary outcomes of malodour and adverse efectsof the treatment; however, it did not assess any of the review'ssecondary outcomes. However, while the included study is relevantto answering the review question, the final small sample of sixwho completed both arms of the trial renders negligible the overallcompleteness and applicability of the findings of this review forinforming clinical practice.
Quality of the evidenceThe results of the review show a positive outcome for the use ofsystemic metronidazole in reducing odour in malignant woundsbut the quality of the evidence is very low. We downgraded theevidence for serious limitations as a third of the participantswithdrew from the study, resulting in attrition bias. Due to thesmall sample size, we further downgraded the evidence for veryserious imprecision; the lack of research in this area has beenhighlighted. The body of evidence on the use of systemic antibioticsin the treatment of malignant wounds is currently limited andfurther high-quality studies are required. We did not downgrade theevidence for inconsistency or publication bias due to insuficientdata. We did not downgrade for indirectness as the evidence is inagreement with the review question.Potential biases in the review processA systematic review was undertaken with a predefined and peer-reviewed research question, search terms, and criteria for inclusionof studies. A comprehensive search strategy was developedand undertaken, including searching of multiple databases.Furthermore, two independent review authors reviewed the resultsof the search and independently identified studies to be includedand excluded. The decision to include both periods of the cross-over trial may have introduced bias; however, given that the 14-day washout period in Ashford 1984 was considered a clinicallysuficient period of time for washout, this was not considered to bea source of concern. For these reasons, we believe potential biasesin the review process are minimal.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAgreements and disagreements with other studies orreviewsA systematic review by De Castro 2015 investigated the efectof metronidazole on the management of odour in patients withfungating wounds, and three trials analysing topical metronidazolepreparations met the criteria for inclusion. The authors concludedthat these studies supported the use of metronidazole topicallybut were limited in terms of their methodology. Adderley 2014additionally systematically reviewed the evidence on topicalpreparations for the treatment of malignant wounds. No currentsystematic reviews exist on the use of systemic antibiotics for thetreatment of malignant wounds. This review, although providinglimited evidence, adds to the overall body of evidence on treatmentoptions in people with malignant wounds.A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N SImplications for practiceIt is uncertain whether metronidazole leads to a reduction inmalodour, in particular in those with recurrent breast cancer. Thequality of the evidence is very low as it is based on one small studyat high risk of bias involving six participants only. Further studiesare required to substantiate the findings from this one study beforesystematic metronidazole is advised for the widespread treatmentof malignant wounds in clinical practice.Implications for research
There is limited evidence on the use of systemic antibiotics fortreating malignant wounds. The only included study in the reviewwas published in 1984. Evidence from large trials in this area couldcontribute to clinical improvements in the lives of patients whosufer from this distressing complication. Further well-designedstudies are urgently needed to assess this important aspect ofclinical care, especially on outcomes related to quality of life,pain and cost-efectiveness. Further studies involving larger samplesizes, with clearly specified methods of randomisation, adequateblinding and objective reporting of suficient outcome measures,are required.A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SThe review authors would like to thank Cochrane Wounds fortheir support in undertaking this review, copy editors ElizabethRoyle and Jason Elliot-Smith for their helpful feedback, and thefollowing peer referees for their comments: Julie Bruce, Jane Nadel(protocol and review); Andrew McKean (review); Mark Rodgers andGill Worthy (protocol).Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewAshford 1984 {published data only}Ashford R, Plant G, Maher J, Teare L. Double-blind trial ofmetronidazole in malodorous ulcerating tumours. Lancet1984;323(8388):1232-3. References to studies excluded from this reviewDankert 1981 {published data only}Dankert J, Holloway Y, Bouma J, Van der Werf J, Wolthers BG.Metronidazole in smelly gynaecological tumours. Lancet1981;318(8258):1295.De Castro 2015 {published data only}De Castro DL, Santos VL. Odor management in fungatingwounds with metronidazole. Journal of Hospice and PalliativeNursing 2015;17(1):73-9.
McGregor 1982 {published data only}McGregor IA, Watson JD, Sweeney G, Sleigh JD. Tinidazole insmelly oropharyngeal tumours. Lancet 1982;319(8263):110.Sparrow 1980 {published data only}Sparrow G, Minton M, Rubens RD, Simmons NA, Aubrey C.Metronidazole in smelly tumours. Lancet 1980;315(8179):1185. Additional referencesAdderley UJ, Holt IG. Topical agents and dressings for fungatingwounds. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue5. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003948.pub3]Alexander 2009Alexander S. Malignant fungating wounds: epidemiology,aetiology, presentation and assessment. Journal of Wound Care2009;18(7):273-80.British National Formulary 2017British Medical Association and the RoyalPharmaceutical Society. British National Formulary.www.medicinescomplete.com/mc/bnf/current/ (accessed 15August 2017).Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy1996;37(1):53-72.European Oncology Nursing Society (EONS). EONSrecommendations for the care of patients with malignantfungating wounds. 2015. www.cancernurse.eu/documents/EONSMalignantFungatingWounds.pdf (accessed 15 August2017).Gethin G, Grocott P, Probst S, Clarke E. Current practice inthe management of wound odour: an international survey.International Journal of Nursing Studies 2014;51(6):865-74.Grocott P, Crowley S. The palliative management of fungatingmalignant wounds: generalising from multiple-case study datausing a system of reasoning. International Journal of NursingStudies 2001;38(5):533-45.Grocott P. Developing a tool for researchingfungating wounds. World Wide Wounds. July 2001.www.worldwidewounds.com/2001/july/Grocott/Fungating-Wounds.html (accessed 30 November 2016).Higgins JP, Green S, editor(s). Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0 (updatedMarch 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available fromhandbook.cochrane.org.
Higgins JP, Altman DG, Sterne JA (editors). Chapter 8: Assessingrisk of bias in included studies. In: Higgins JP, Green S,editor(s). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews ofInterventions Version 5.1.0 (updated March 2011). The CochraneCollaboration, 2011. Available from handbook.cochrane.org.Jenkinson 1996Jenkinson C, Layte R, Wright L, Coulter A. The UK SF-36: ananalysis and interpretation manual. Oxford: Health ServicesResearch Unit, University of Oxford, 1996.Lefebvre C, Manheimer E, Glanville J, on behalf of the CochraneInformation Retrieval Methods Group. Chapter 6: Searching forstudies. In: Higgins JP, Green S, editor(s). Cochrane Handbookfor Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0 (updatedMarch 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available fromhandbook.cochrane.org.Lofmark S, Edlund C, Nord CE. Metronidazole is still the drug ofchoice for treatment of anaerobic infections. Clinical InfectiousDiseases 2010;1:16-23.McDonald A, Lesage P. Palliative management of pressureulcers and malignant wounds in patients with advanced illness.Journal of Palliative Medicine 2006;9(2):285-95.Mortimer P. Management of skin problems: medical aspects.In: Doyle D, Hanks G, Cherny N, Calman K editor(s). OxfordTextbook of Palliative Medicine. 3rd Edition. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press, 2003:618-28.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsRang HP, Dale MM, Ritter JM, Moore PK. Pharmacology.Edinburgh: Elsevier, 2003.Review Manager 2014 [Computer program]The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration.Review Manager 5 (RevMan 5). Version 5.3. Copenhagen: TheNordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014.Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Higgins JP, Vist GE, Glasziou P,Guyatt GH. Chapter 11: Presenting results and 'Summary offindings' tables. In: Higgins JP, Green S, editor(s). CochraneHandbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version5.1.0 (updated March 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011.Available from handbook.cochrane.org.Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Higgins JP, Deeks JJ, Glasziou P,Guyatt GH. Chapter 12: Interpreting results and drawingconclusions. In: Higgins JP, Green S, editor(s). CochraneHandbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version5.1.0 (updated March 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011.Available from handbook.cochrane.org.Seaman S. Management of malignant fungating woundsin advanced cancer. Seminars in Oncology Nursing2006;22(3):185-93.Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). SearchFilters. www.sign.ac.uk/search-filters.html (accessed 15 August2017).World Health Organisation (WHO). WHO handbook forreporting results of cancer treatment. 1979. apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/37200/1/WHO_OFFSET_48.pdf (accessed 27May 2016). References to other published versions of this reviewRamasubbu 2015Ramasubbu DA, Smith V, Hayden F, Cronin P. Systemicantibiotics for treating malignant wounds. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 4. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD011609] C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E S
Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID] MethodsRandomised, double-blind, cross-over trial that explored the use of metronidazole for controlling thesmell from fungating wounds in patients with breast cancer, using a placebo for comparison.Care setting and location: not clearly stated; however, the authors worked in hospitals in London, UK.ParticipantsPeople with breast cancer, and a fungating wound which had a troublesome smell and was unlikely torespond to irradiation or chemotherapy. Six of the nine who were recruited to the trial participated andcompleted both arms of the study. Mean age and sex were not reported.InterventionsIntervention: metronidazole 200 milligram tablets given orally three times daily (TDS) for 14 days; andplacebo tablets TDS given orally for 14 days.Participants acting as their own controls.OutcomesSmell scores and anaerobe culture results were reported.Smell was graded 0 to 3 with 0 indicating the smell was 'absent', 1 being 'not offensive', 2 being 'offen-sive but tolerable' and 3 being 'offensive and intolerable'. Anaerobe culture results were reported as '-','+', '++' and '+++'.NotesFunding source was not stated.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskIt was stated that "a randomised, double-blind, cross-over design" was used(p1232) but detail on how the random sequence was generated was not pro-vided.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskNo detail about sequence generation or allocation concealment was provided.Low riskThe trial was described as double blind whereby both participants and per-sonnel were blind to the intervention and control through the use of "identicaltablets".Blinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomesLow riskIt was stated that the participant, nurse and doctor independently assessedsmell at each visit; "double-blind" implied that participant and personnel wereunaware of which treatment is being dispensed at any particular time.High riskOriginal sample size was 9 but 3 participants were withdrawn; results are pre-sented for 6 (2/3rds of the original sample). This is a small sample size that islikely to have impacted on the results.Unclear riskTrial registration was not available, and because the outcomes of interestwere not clearly specified, only inferred, we assessed the risk of bias for selec-tive reporting as unclear.Other biasUnclear riskLimited information on participant characteristics (e.g. age) and study setting.Ashford 1984  (Continued) Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID] StudyReason for exclusionDankert 1981This study was not a trial (RCT or CCT) but was a case report on 4 participants with fungating gy-naecological tumours treated with metronidazole.
De Castro 2015This study was not a trial (RCT or CCT) but was a systematic review of the use of metronidazole(topical application) for odour control in malignant fungating wounds.McGregor 1982This study was a double-blind trial of 8 participants who received tinidazole (8 g over 7 days) pre-and post-operatively for prevention of infection in people with oropharyngeal tumours and not fortreatment of malignant wounds.Sparrow 1980This study was not a trial (RCT or CCT) but was an observational study of 9 participants with fungat-ing breast carcinoma and treated with metronidazole 400 milligrams three times daily.  Comparison 1.   Metronidazole versus PlaceboOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size1 Malodour (Smell Score)1 Mean Difference (IV, Fixed, 95% CI)Totals not selected  Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.1.   Comparison 1 Metronidazole versus Placebo, Outcome 1 Malodour (Smell Score).Study or subgroupMetronidazolePlaceboMean DifferenceMean Difference
 NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Fixed, 95% CIFixed, 95% CIMetronidazole105-10-50Placebo Appendix 1. Central search strategyCochrane Wounds Specialised Register1 MESH DESCRIPTOR Skin Ulcer EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER2 MESH DESCRIPTOR Neoplasms EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER3 #1 AND #24 MESH DESCRIPTOR Ulcer EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER5 MESH DESCRIPTOR Skin Neoplasms EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER6 #4 AND #57 (fungat* near3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*)) AND INREGISTER8 (ulcera* near3 (tumor* or tumour*)) AND INREGISTER9 (malodorous near3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)) AND INREGISTER10 (smelly near3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)) AND INREGISTER11 ((malignant or tumoral or neoplas* or cancer) near3 wound*) AND INREGISTER12 ((melanoma or carcinoma or sarcoma or metasta*) near5 ulcer*) AND INREGISTER13 #3 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #1214 MESH DESCRIPTOR Anti-Infective Agents EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER15 MESH DESCRIPTOR Antibiotic Prophylaxis EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER16 MESH DESCRIPTOR Nitroimidazoles EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER17 (Antibiotic* or Nitroimidazole* or Dimetridazole or Etanidazole or Ipronidazole or Metronidazole or Misonidazole or Nimorazole orOrnidazole or Ronidazole or Tinidazole) AND INREGISTER18 MESH DESCRIPTOR Tetracyclines EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER19 (Tetracycline* or Chlortetracycline or Demeclocycline or Doxycycline or Lymecycline or Methacycline or Minocycline or Oxytetracyclineor Rolitetracycline) AND INREGISTER20 (Erythromycin or Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin) AND INREGISTER21 (Spiramycin or Azithromycin or Roxithromicin or Roxithromycin) AND INREGISTER22 MESH DESCRIPTOR Penicillins EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER23 (Penicillin* or Phenoxymethylpenicillin or Amoxicillin or Ampicillin or Flucloxacillin or Amoxiclav) AND INREGISTER24 #14 OR #15 OR #16 OR #17 OR #18 OR #19 OR #20 OR #21 OR #22 OR #2325 #13 AND #24
The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Clinical Trials (CENTRAL)#1 MeSH descriptor: [Skin Ulcer] explode all trees#2 MeSH descriptor: [Neoplasms] explode all trees#3 #1 and #2#4 MeSH descriptor: [Ulcer] explode all trees#5 MeSH descriptor: [Skin Neoplasms] explode all trees#6 #4 and #5#7 (fungat* near/3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*)):ti,ab#8 (ulcera* near/3 (tumor* or tumour*)):ti,ab#9 (malodorous near/3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)):ti,ab#10 (smelly near/3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)):ti,ab#11 ((malignant or tumoral or neoplas* or cancer) near/3 wound*):ti,ab#12 ((melanoma or carcinoma or sarcoma or metasta*) near/5 ulcer*) .ti,ab.#13 #3 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 or #12#14 MeSH descriptor: [Anti-Infective Agents] explode all trees#15 MeSH descriptor: [Antibiotic Prophylaxis] explode all trees#16 MeSH descriptor: [Nitroimidazoles] explode all treesSystemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews#17 (Antibiotic* or Nitroimidazole* or Dimetridazole or Etanidazole or Ipronidazole or Metronidazole or Misonidazole or Nimorazole orOrnidazole or Ronidazole or Tinidazole):ti,ab#18 MeSH descriptor: [Tetracyclines] explode all trees#19 (Tetracycline* or Chlortetracycline or Demeclocycline or Doxycycline or Lymecycline or Methacycline or Minocycline or Oxytetracyclineor Rolitetracycline):ti,ab#20 (Erythromycin or Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin):ti,ab#21 (Spiramycin or Azithromycin or Roxithromicin or Roxithromycin):ti,ab#22 MeSH descriptor: [Penicillins] explode all trees#23 (Penicillin* or Phenoxymethylpenicillin or Amoxicillin or Ampicillin or Flucloxacillin or Amoxiclav):ti,ab#24 #14 or #15 or #16 or #17 or #18 or #19 or #20 or #21 or #22 or #23#25 #13 and #24
Ovid MEDLINE1 exp Skin Ulcer/ and exp Neoplasms/2 Ulcer/ and exp Skin Neoplasms/3 (fungat* adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*)).tw.4 (ulcera* adj3 (tumor* or tumour*)).tw.5 (smelly adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)).tw.6 (malodorous adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)).tw.7 ((malignant or tumoral or neoplas* or cancer) adj3 wound*).tw.8 ((melanoma or carcinoma or sarcoma or metasta*) adj5 ulcer*).tw.9 or/1-810 exp Anti-Infective Agents/11 Antibiotic Prophylaxis/12 exp Nitroimidazoles/13 (Antibiotic* or Nitroimidazole* or Dimetridazole or Etanidazole or Ipronidazole or Metronidazole or Misonidazole or Nimorazole orOrnidazole or Ronidazole or Tinidazole).ti,ab,rn.14 exp Tetracyclines/15 (Tetracycline* or Chlortetracycline or Demeclocycline or Doxycycline or Lymecycline or Methacycline or Minocycline or Oxytetracyclineor Rolitetracycline).ti,ab,rn.16 (Erythromycin or Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin).ti,ab,rn.17 (Spiramycin or Azithromycin or Roxithromicin or Roxithromycin).ti,ab,rn.18 exp Penicillins/19 (Penicillin* or Phenoxymethylpenicillin or Amoxicillin or Ampicillin or Flucloxacillin or Amoxiclav).ti,ab,rn.20 or/10-1921 and/9,2022 randomized controlled trial.pt.23 controlled clinical trial.pt.24 randomi?ed.ab.25 placebo.ab.26 clinical trials as topic.sh.27 randomly.ab.28 trial.ti.29 or/22-2830 exp animals/ not humans.sh.31 29 not 3032 21 and 31
Ovid Embase1 exp skin ulcer/ and exp neoplasm/2 (ulcer/ or exp nose ulcer/ or ulcer healing/ or exp urogenital ulcer/) and exp skin tumor/3 (fungat* adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*)).tw.4 (ulcera* adj3 (tumor* or tumour*)).tw.5 (malodorous adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)).tw.6 (smelly adj3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or ulcer*)).tw.7 ((malignant or tumoral or neoplas* or cancer) adj3 wound*).tw.8 ((melanoma or carcinoma or sarcoma or metasta*) adj5 ulcer*).tw.9 or/1-810 exp antiinfective agent/11 antibiotic prophylaxis/12 exp nitroimidazole derivative/Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews13 (Antibiotic* or Nitroimidazole* or Dimetridazole or Etanidazole or Ipronidazole or Metronidazole or Misonidazole or Nimorazole orOrnidazole or Ronidazole or Tinidazole).ti,ab,rn.14 exp tetracycline derivative/15 (Tetracycline* or Chlortetracycline or Demeclocycline or Doxycycline or Lymecycline or Methacycline or Minocycline or Oxytetracyclineor Rolitetracycline).ti,ab,rn.16 (Erythromycin or Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin).ti,ab,rn.17 (Spiramycin or Azithromycin or Roxithromicin or Roxithromycin).ti,ab,rn.18 exp Penicillins/19 (Penicillin* or Phenoxymethylpenicillin or Amoxicillin or Ampicillin or Flucloxacillin or Amoxiclav).ti,ab,rn.20 or/10-1921 and/9,2022 Randomized controlled trials/23 Single-Blind Method/24 Double-Blind Method/25 Crossover Procedure/26 (random* or factorial* or crossover* or cross over* or cross-over* or placebo* or assign* or allocat* or volunteer*).ti,ab.27 (doubl* adj blind*).ti,ab.28 (singl* adj blind*).ti,ab.29 or/22-2830 exp animals/ or exp invertebrate/ or animal experiment/ or animal model/ or animal tissue/ or animal cell/ or nonhuman/31 human/ or human cell/32 and/30-3133 30 not 3234 29 not 3335 21 and 34
EBSCO CINAHL PlusS32 S18 AND S31S31 S19 OR S20 OR S21 OR S22 OR S23 OR S24 OR S25 OR S26 OR S27 OR S28 OR S29 OR S30S30 TI allocat* random* or AB allocat* random*S29 MH "Quantitative Studies"S28 TI placebo* or AB placebo*S27 MH "Placebos"S26 TI random* allocat* or AB random* allocat*S25 MH "Random Assignment"S24 TI randomi?ed control* trial* or AB randomi?ed control* trial*S23 AB ( singl* or doubl* or trebl* or tripl* ) and AB ( blind* or mask* )S22 TI ( singl* or doubl* or trebl* or tripl* ) and TI ( blind* or mask* )S21 TI clinic* N1 trial* or AB clinic* N1 trial*S20 PT Clinical trialS19 MH "Clinical Trials+"S18 S7 AND S17S17 S8 OR S9 OR S10 OR S11 OR S12 OR S13 OR S14 OR S15 OR S16S16 TX (Penicillin* or Phenoxymethylpenicillin or Amoxicillin or Ampicillin or Flucloxacillin or Amoxiclav)S15 (MH "Penicillins+")S14 TX (Spiramycin or Azithromycin or Roxithromicin)S13 TX (Erythromycin or Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin)S12 TX (Tetracycline* or Chlortetracycline or Demeclocycline or Doxycycline or Lymecycline or Methacycline or Minocycline orOxytetracycline or Rolitetracycline or Tetracycline)S11 (MH "Tetracyclines+")S10 TX (Antibiotic* or Nitroimidazole* or Dimetridazole or Etanidazole or Ipronidazole or Metronidazole or Misonidazole or Nimorazole orOrnidazole or Ronidazole or Tinidazole)S9 (MH "Antibiotic Prophylaxis")S8 (MH "Antiinfective Agents+")S7 S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6S6 TX ((melanoma or carcinoma or sarcoma or metasta*) N5 ulcer*)S5 TX ((malignant or tumoral or neoplas* or cancer) N3 wound*)S4 TX (ulcera* N3 (tumor* or tumour*))S3 TX (fungat* N3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*)) OR TX (smelly N3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*))OR TX (malodorous N3 (wound* or tumor* or tumour* or lesion* or ulcer*))S2 (MH "Ulcer") AND (MH "Skin Neoplasms+")Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsS1 (MH "Skin Ulcer+") AND (MH "Neoplasms+")US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register (ClinicalTrials.gov)World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform("malignant wound" OR "fungating wound") AND ("neoplasm" OR "cancer" OR "carcinoma" OR "tumor" OR "tumour")Appendix 2. Risk of bias criteria1.  Was the allocation sequence randomly generated?The investigators describe a random component in the sequence generation process such as: referring to a random number table; using acomputer random number generator; coin tossing; shufling cards or envelopes; throwing dice; drawing of lots.The investigators describe a non-random component in the sequence generation process. Usually, the description would involve somesystematic, non-random approach, for example: sequence generated by odd or even date of birth; sequence generated by some rule basedon date (or day) of admission; sequence generated by some rule based on hospital or clinic record number.Insuficient information about the sequence generation process available to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias.2.  Was the treatment allocation adequately concealed?Low risk of biasParticipants and investigators enrolling participants could not foresee assignment because one of the following, or an equivalent method,was used to conceal allocation: central allocation (including telephone, web-based and pharmacy-controlled randomisation); sequentiallynumbered drug containers of identical appearance; sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes.High risk of bias
Participants or investigators enrolling participants could possibly foresee assignments and thus introduce selection bias, such as allocationbased on: use of an open random allocation schedule (e.g. a list of random numbers); assignment envelopes without appropriatesafeguards (e.g. envelopes were unsealed, non-opaque or not sequentially numbered); alternation or rotation; date of birth; case recordnumber; any other explicitly unconcealed procedure.UnclearInsuficient information available to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias. This is usually the case if the method of concealment is notdescribed or not described in suficient detail to allow a definite judgement, for example if the use of assignment envelopes is described,but it remains unclear whether envelopes were sequentially numbered, opaque and sealed.3.  Blinding - was knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately prevented during the study?Low risk of bias*No blinding, but the review authors judge that the outcome and the outcome measurement are not likely to be influenced by lack ofblinding.*Blinding of participants and key study personnel ensured, and unlikely that the blinding could have been broken.*Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, but outcome assessment was blinded and the non-blinding of othersunlikely to introduce bias.High risk of biasAny one of the following.
*No blinding or incomplete blinding, and the outcome or outcome measurement is likely to be influenced by lack of blinding.*Blinding of key study participants and personnel attempted, but likely that the blinding could have been broken.*Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, and the non-blinding of others likely to introduce bias.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsUnclear*Insuficient information available to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias.*The study did not address this outcome.
4. Were incomplete outcome data adequately addressed?Low risk of biasAny one of the following.*No missing outcome data.*Reasons for missing outcome data unlikely to be related to true outcome (for survival data, censoring unlikely to be introducing bias).*Missing outcome data balanced in numbers across intervention groups, with similar reasons for missing data across groups.*For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with observed event risk is not enough to have aclinically relevant impact on the intervention efect estimate.*For continuous outcome data, plausible efect size (diference in means or standardised diference in means) among missing outcomesis not enough to have a clinically relevant impact on observed efect size.*Missing data have been imputed using appropriate methods.High risk of bias*Reason for missing outcome data is likely to be related to true outcome, with either imbalance in numbers or reasons for missing dataacross intervention groups.*For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with observed event risk is enough to induce clinicallyrelevant bias in intervention efect estimate.*For continuous outcome data, plausible efect size (diference in means or standardised diference in means) among missing outcomesis enough to induce clinically relevant bias in observed efect size.*'As-treated' analysis done with substantial departure of the intervention received from that assigned at randomisation.*Potentially inappropriate application of simple imputation.Unclear*Insuficient reporting of attrition/exclusions to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias (e.g. number randomised not stated, noreasons for missing data provided).*The study did not address this outcome.
5. Are reports of the study free of suggestion of selective outcome reporting?Low risk of biasEither of the following.*The study protocol is available and all of the study's pre-specified (primary and secondary) outcomes that are of interest in the reviewhave been reported in the pre-specified way.*The study protocol is not available but it is clear that the published reports include all expected outcomes, including those that werepre-specified (convincing text of this nature may be uncommon).High risk of biasAny one of the following.*Not all of the study's pre-specified primary outcomes have been reported.*One or more primary outcomes is reported using measurements, analysis methods or subsets of the data (e.g. sub-scales) that werenot pre-specified.*One or more reported primary outcomes were not pre-specified (unless clear justification for their reporting is provided, such as anunexpected adverse efect).*One or more outcomes of interest in the review are reported incompletely so that they cannot be entered in a meta-analysis.*The study report fails to include results for a key outcome that would be expected to have been reported for such a study.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsUnclearInsuficient information available to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias. It is likely that the majority of studies will fall into thiscategory.6. Other sources of potential biasLow risk of bias
The study appears to be free of other sources of bias.High risk of biasThere is at least one important risk of bias. For example, the study:*had a potential source of bias related to the specific study design used; or*has been claimed to have been fraudulent; or*had some other problem.UnclearThere may be a risk of bias, but there is either:*insuficient information to assess whether an important risk of bias exists; or*insuficient rationale or evidence that an identified problem will introduce bias.C O N T R I B U T I O N S   O F   A U T H O R S
Darshini Ramasubbu: conceived, designed and coordinated the review; extracted data; checked the quality of data extraction; checkedquality assessment; produced the first draf of the review; contributed to writing and editing the review; made an intellectual contributionto the review; performed previous work that was the foundation of the current review; wrote to study author/experts/companies; provideddata; performed economic analysis; performed translations; approved the final review prior to submission and is a guarantor of the review.Valerie Smith: conceived and designed the review; checked the quality of data extraction; analysed or interpreted data; undertook andchecked quality assessment; performed statistical analysis; checked the quality of the statistical analysis; produced the first draf of thereview; contributed to writing or editing the review; made an intellectual contribution to the review; advised on the review and approvedthe final review prior to submission.Fiona Hayden: made an intellectual contribution to the review; advised on the review and approved the final review prior to submission.Patricia Cronin: conceived, designed and coordinated the review; extracted data; checked the quality of data extraction; analysed orinterpreted data; undertook quality assessment; performed statistical analysis; produced the first draf of the review; contributed to writingor editing the review; made an intellectual contribution to the review; performed previous work that was the foundation of the currentreview; wrote to study author/experts/companies and approved the final review prior to submission.
Contributions of editorial base:Andrea Nelson (Editor): edited the protocol; advised on methodology interpretation and content; approved the final protocol prior tosubmission.Gill Norman (Editor): edited the review; advised on methodology interpretation and content; approved the final review prior tosubmission.Gill Rizzello and Sally Bell-Syer (Managing Editors): co-ordinated the editorial process; advised on interpretation and content; edited theprotocol and the review.Zipporah Iheozor-Ejiofor (Methodologist): advised on methodology in the review.Reetu Child and Naomi Shaw (Information Specialists): designed the search strategy, edited the search methods section and ran thesearches for the review.Ursula Gonthier (Editorial Assistant): edited the plain language summary and reference sections of the review.D E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S TDarshini Ramasubbu: none known.Valerie Smith: none known.Systemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsFiona Hayden: none known.
Patricia Cronin: none known.S O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources*No sources of support suppliedExternal sources*This project was supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to CochraneWounds. The views and opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the SystematicReviews Programme, NIHR, NHS or the Department of Health, UK.D I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E WWe updated our search strategies adding terms for smelly and malodorous tumours.I N D E X   T E R M SMedical Subject Headings (MeSH)*Odorants;  Anti-Bacterial Agents  [*therapeutic use];  Anti-Infective Agents  [*therapeutic use];  Double-Blind Method;  Metronidazole [*therapeutic use];  Neoplasms  [*complications];  Prospective Studies;  Sof Tissue Injuries  [drug therapy]  [etiology];  Wounds andInjuries  [*drug therapy]  [etiology]MeSH check wordsHumansSystemic antibiotics for treating malignant wounds (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
