ORIGINAL ARTICLEPsoriasis increases risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation: a systematic review andmeta-analysis of prospective observational studiesSikarin Upalaa,b, Afeefa Shahnawaza and Anawin Sanguankeoa,baDepartment of Internal Medicine, Bassett Medical Center and Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Cooperstown, NY, USA;bDepartment of Preventive and Social Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand
ABSTRACTBackground: Psoriasis is a common chronic immune-mediated dermatological disease that increases therisk of cardiovascular disease. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the associ-ation between psoriasis and atrial fibrillation from prospective observational studies.Methods: A comprehensive search of the databases of the MEDLINE and EMBASE was performed frominception through November 2015. The inclusion criterion was the prospective observational study thatassessed the risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation in adults with psoriasis. Outcome was the adjusted hazardratio (HR) of atrial fibrillation comparison between patients with psoriasis and controls. Pooled HR and95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using a random-effects model.Results: The initial search yielded 176 articles. Fifteen articles underwent full-length review and data wereextracted from 4 observational studies. Incidence of atrial fibrillation was ascertained by cardiologist-reviewed electrocardiograms. There was a significant increased risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation inpatients with psoriasis compared to controls with a pooled HR 1.42 (95%CI 1.22-1.65).Conclusion: Our meta-analysis of prospective studies demonstrated that patients with psoriasis haveincreased risk of new-onset atrial fibrillation. Future interventional studies addressing the impact of psoria-sis treatment and prevention of atrial fibrillation should be performed.ARTICLE HISTORYReceived 17 August 2016Accepted 24 October 2016Published online 17 Novem-ber 2016KEYWORDSPsoriasis; atrial fibrillation;meta-analysisIntroduction
Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated systemic inflammatorydisease that according to the National Health and NutritionExamination Survey affects 3.2% of the US population, accountingfor 7.2 million adults in the US alone (1). Psoriasis manifests notonly with physical manifestations affecting skin and joints, butrecently a lot of research has gone into the emotional toll psoria-sis takes on a person's psychological well-being. The commoncomorbidities of cutaneous psoriasis include psoriatic arthritis(PsA), Crohn's disease, uveitis and depression (2,3). In addition,cardiovascular disease risk factors (including metabolic syndrome)are seen more frequently among patients with psoriasis, andstrong epidemiologic evidence has demonstrated that psoriasis isindependently associated with myocardial infarction. As thesecomorbid conditions and other medical complications adverselyaffect morbidity and mortality in patients with psoriasis, dermatol-ogists working with this heinous disease can play an importantroleinpromptlyidentifyingand,whennecessary,referringpatients for further workup and treatment when signs or symp-toms of these comorbidities or complications are observed (4).Recent studies have brought to light the association betweenpsoriasis and atrial fibrillation (AF) (5), which is the most commoncardiac arrhythmia encountered in clinical practice and is in itselfassociated with increased risk of morbidity and mortality (6).There is recent evidence to support possible implication of oxida-tive stress and inflammation as important contributors to thepathophysiology of atrial fibrillation (7,8).The authors of this systemic review and meta-analysis reviewedthe current evidence that support a possible relationship betweenpsoriasis and atrial fibrillation by examining previous epidemio-logic studies and obtaining a conclusion based on the findings.
Materials and methodsThis systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted andreported according to the Meta-analysis Of Observational Studiesin Epidemiology statement (9).Search strategyTwo authors (AS, SU) independently searched published studiesindexed in the MEDLINE and EMBASE databases. References of allselected studies were also examined. The following main searchterms were used: psoriasis and atrial fibrillation. The full searchterms used are detailed in the Appendix.Inclusion and exclusion criteriaThis review included all published prospective observational stud-ies that assessed the association of psoriasis and atrial fibrillation.Reviews, case reports and abstracts were excluded because theirquality of studies could not be assessed.We included studies that recruited participants aged 18 yearsor older who had psoriasis. The main outcome of this study wasnew onset atrial fibrillation reported as incidence, odds ratio (OR),risk ratio (RR), or hazard ratio (HR) comparing between patientswith psoriasis at baseline and without psoriasis. Mild psoriasis wasdefined if a patient was treated only with topical medicationsCONTACT Anawin Sanguankeo, Atwell Rd, Cooperstown, NY 13326, USA 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
during the follow-up period, whereas moderate-to-severe psoriasiswas defined if a patient was treated with phototherapy or sys-temic medications during the follow-up period.Data extractionTwo authors independently reviewed titles and abstracts of allcitations that were identified. After all abstracts were reviewed,data comparisons between the two investigators were conductedto ensure completeness and reliability. The inclusion criteria wereindependently applied to all identified studies. Differing decisionswere resolved by consensus.Full-text versions of potentially relevant papers identified inthe initial screening were retrieved. If multiple articles from thesame study were found, only the article with the most completedata was included to prevent data duplication. Data concerningauthors, year of publication, source, study design, baseline partici-pant characteristics, type of psoriasis, duration of psoriasis, assess-ment of atrial fibrillation and factors used in the multivariatemodel were independently extracted. We planned to contact theauthors of the primary reports to request any unpublished data. Ifthe authors did not reply, we planned to use the available datafor our analyses.Assessment of quality
A subjective assessment of methodological quality for observa-tional studies was evaluated by two authors (AS and SU) usingthe Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) (10). The NOS is a qualityassessment tool for non-randomized studies. It uses a "star sys-tem" based on three major perspectives: selection of the studygroups (0-4 stars, or 0-5 stars for cross-sectional study), compari-son of the groups by controlling for important and additional rele-vant factors (0-2 stars) and the ascertainment of outcome ofinterest or exposure (0-3 stars). A total score of 3 or less was con-sidered poor, 4-6 was considered moderate and 7-9 was deemedhigh quality. We excluded studies from our meta-analysis if theyhad poor quality (score 3). Discrepant opinions between authorswere resolved by consensus.Statistical analysis
Weperformedmeta-analysisoftheincludedstudiesusingComprehensiveMeta-Analysis3.3softwarefromBiostat,Inc(Englewood, NJ). We calculated pooled hazard ratio (HR) of out-come for cohort studies in multivariable model. The adjusted fac-tors included age, sex, co-morbidity, smoker, socioeconomic data.All outcomes were reported as effect estimate and its 95% confi-dence intervals (CIs) comparing between psoriasis and controlgroups using a random-effects model. We excluded studies frommeta-analysis and only presented the result with narrative descrip-tion (qualitative analysis) when there were not sufficient dataavailable for calculating pooled effect size. The heterogeneity ofeffect estimates across these studies was quantified using the Qstatistic and I2 (p < .10 was considered statistically significant). TheQ statistic compared the observed between-study dispersion andexpected dispersion of the effect size, and was expressed in p val-ues for statistical significance. An I2 is the ratio of true heterogen-eity to total observed variation. An I2 of 0-40% was considered toexclude heterogeneity, of 30-60% was considered to representmoderate heterogeneity, of 50-90% was considered to representsubstantial heterogeneity, and of 75-100% was considered to rep-resent considerable heterogeneity (11). A sensitivity analysis wasperformed to assess influence of the individual studies on theoverall results by omitting one study at a time and using fixed-effect analysis when I2<40%. Subgroup analysis and meta-regres-sion were performed to find factors that may explain heterogen-eity or difference in outcome between each study. Publicationbias was assessed using funnel plot, Egger's regression test and itsimplications with the trim and fill method (12).ResultsDescription of included studies
The initial search yielded 176 articles (Appendix); 161 articles wereexcluded because they were not observational studies (95 articles),did not include patients with psoriasis (34 articles), or did notmeasure new onset AF as an outcome (32 articles). A total of 15articles underwent full-length review. Data were extracted fromfour studies for qualitative analysis (13-16). All studies had pro-spective designs, involving totally 12,755 participants with amedian follow-up time between 2.5 and 5 years. Psoriasis wasidentified by a medical code associated with clinic visits to adermatologist. Incidence of atrial fibrillation was ascertained bycardiologist-reviewed electrocardiograms. The characteristics ofthe four extracted studies included in this review are outlined inTable 1.Quality assessment of included studiesThe quality of the included studies was evaluated by NOS (Table 1).Total score ranged from 5-8. None of the studies was excludedfrom the meta-analysis by having poor quality.Meta-analysis results
There was a statistically significant higher risk of new-onset AF inpatients who had psoriasis with pooled HR of 1.42 (95%CI 1.22-1.65). The statistical between-study heterogeneity (I2) was 68%,p  1/4 .01 (Figure 1). In subgroup analysis by severity of psoriasis(Figure 2), there is no difference between mild (HR  1/41.22, 95%CI1.15-1.30) and severe (HR  1/41.51, 95%CI 1.22-1.87) psoriasis (pvalue between subgroup was .06).DiscussionAtrial fibrillation is the most common cardiac arrhythmia and alsoaccounts for more than 25% of all strokes (17). For this reason, itbecomes important to identify predisposing factors for atrial fibril-lation in order to reduce risk factors and work toward preventionstrategies. There is an established association between psoriasisand cardiovascular disease, which supports the hypothesis thatpatients with psoriasis may also have an increased incidence ofatrial fibrillation.The current study is, to our knowledge, the first systematic andmeta-analysis review to examine the risk of AF in psoriaticpatients in four studies demonstrating the relationship betweennew onset atrial fibrillation and psoriasis. For two of these fourstudies, we did a subgroup analysis of mild and severe psoriasis.So, a total of three analyses were conducted, one combiningresults of mild and severe psoriasis together, one using only mildpsoriasis, and one using severe psoriasis.Study (year)DesignStudy periodStudy populationExclusion criteriaParticipants (N)End pointFactors adjusted in multi-variable analysis
Ahlehoff (2012)Prospective cohort1997-2006Entire DanishPopulationPrevious atrial fibril-lation or stroke4,518,484Atrial fibrillation,ischemic strokeCalendar year, concomi-tant medication, co-mor-bidity, socioeconomicdata, and genderBang (2014)Prospective cohortN/AHypertensivepatients with leftventricularhypertrophyEstablished heartfailure, myocardialinfarction, or atrialfibrillation7099Atrial fibrillation,heart failureAge, sex, hemoglobin, dia-betes, time-varying SBP,heart rate, study treat-ment and Sokolow-LyonhypertrophyArmstrong (2013)Prospective cohort2004-2009Database ofUniversity ofCalifornia DavisNot on cardiac cath-eterization list507Atrial fibrillationRace, dyslipidemia, chronicobstructive pulmonary dis-ease, or hypertensionParisi (2015)Prospective cohort1994-2009Patients aged 20years or olderHistory of cardiovas-cular disease48,523Major cardiovasculareventsInflammatory arthritis, dia-betes, chronic kidney dis-ease, hypertension,transient ischemic attack,atrial fibrillation, valvularheart disease, thrombo-embolism, congestiveheart failure, depression,current smoker, age, andgender408S. UPALA ET AL.
All three results were statistically significant, showing that newonset atrial fibrillation is more common in patients with psoriasiswhether it be mild, moderate or severe psoriasis. These resultswere found to be independent of age, gender, co-morbidity, con-comitantmedicationand socioeconomicstatus. These novelresults add to already existing evidence of the role of psoriasis asa clinically relevant cardiovascular risk factor and they call forincreased awareness of cardiovascular risk factor management inthis large group of patients.The strengths of the study lie in the large pooled cohort ofstudy subjects including Ahlehoff et al. (13) which included theentire Danish population in their database above age 10, andParisi et al. (16) which was also adequately powered. Follow-uptime frames were sufficiently long for all studies included in themeta-analysis. Finally, we conducted subgroup analysis which dis-played a consistency across the board independent of diseaseseverity.The major limitation of our study lies in the fact that observa-tional studies are inherently susceptible to bias and confounding.Another limitation includes incidental atrial fibrillation occurrencein patients with concurrent psoriasis, which could impact the finaldata and overall results. Another important limitation was ourinability to account for some important cardiovascular risk factors,e.g. smoking, lipid levels, and obesity, which in turn would affectthe overall results in their unique way. Furthermore, a socioeco-nomically and ethnically diverse patient population was studiedunder one umbrella whereby each of the unique patient popula-tions with their specific co-morbidities would affect the incidenceof atrial fibrillation and psoriasis independent of each other, andthus affect the results. Misclassification of cardiovascular diseasesand risk factors due to, for example, untreated hypertension, dia-betes, or dyslipidemia represents another potential source of bias.In order to eliminate this potential bias, additional cohorts shouldbe studied in specific patient populations with respect to cardio-vascular risk factors, specific comorbid conditions to further inves-tigate the association between psoriasis and atrial fibrillation. Thestudies in these additional populations could help address pos-sible reasons for discordant findings if they were present. Withstudy populations studied with new-onset atrial fibrillation, parox-ysmal or persistent could possibly have missed episodes ofasymptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.Thus, our results may underestimate atrial fibrillation occur-rence and primarily detect symptomatic atrial fibrillation betweengroups with and without psoriasis. Furthermore, we see that inour cohort a discordant number of patients was exposed to bio-logic treatments for psoriasis, thus it was not possible to investi-gate whether biologic therapy potentially reduces the risk ofmajor CV events, including atrial fibrillation. Psoriasis has previ-ously been associated with cardiovascular risk factors and cardio-vascular morbidity and mortality (18-21). Furthermore, there arereports of decreased cardiovascular risk in patients with psoriasisreceiving treatment with either systemic anti-inflammatory ther-apy including methotrexate or tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibi-tors and, conversely, a reduction in psoriatic skin manifestations ofplaque after treatment with statins has been suggested in litera-ture (22-24).Overall, this review showed strong evidence of associationbetween atrial fibrillation and psoriasis irrespective of diseaseseverity. Based on the data we found and our study results, itwould be of interest to know if such a relationship exists betweenpatients with psoriasis and concurrent atrial fibrillation, and iftreatment with one would beneficially affect the other. However,it would still stand true, based on existing evidence, that patientswith inflammatory arthritis are at increased risk of CVD and this
may be an additional reason to minimize the patient's inflamma-tory burden. Another arena of further research would includedelineating if other inflammatory diseases were associated withatrial fibrillation based on the existing association between thetwo, considering inflammation is likely to be a common denomin-ator. Lastly, as mentioned before, it would be prudent to sub-ana-lyze different patient populations with atrial fibrillation andpsoriasis to establish a more firm causal linkage between the twoinflammatory conditions.AcknowledgementsAuthors thank Matthew Roslund for the validation of the search.Ethical approvalThis article does not contain any studies with human participantsor animals performed by any of the authors.Disclosure statementThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.References
1.Rachakonda TD, Schupp CW, Armstrong AW. Psoriasis preva-lence among adults in the United States. J Am AcadDermatol. 2014;70:512-16.2.Gupta MA, Schork NJ, Gupta AK, et al. Suicidal ideation inpsoriasis. Int J Dermatol. 1993;32:188-90.3.Kirby B, Richards HL, Mason DL, et al. Alcohol consumptionand psychological distress in patients with psoriasis. Br JDermatol. 2008;158:138-40.4.Ros S, Puig L, Carrascosa JM. Cumulative life course impair-ment: the imprint of psoriasis on the patient's life. ActasDermosifiliogr. 2014;105:128-34.5.Zhang Z, Li G, Liu T. Psoriasis and risk of atrial fibrillation.Int J Cardiol. 2015;185:301-3.6.Kannel WB, Benjamin EJ. Status of the epidemiology of atrialfibrillation. Med Clin North Am. 2008;92:17-40.7.Dudley SC, Jr., Hoch NE, McCann LA, et al. Atrial fibrillationincreases production of superoxide by the left atrium andleft atrial appendage: role of the NADPH and xanthine oxi-dases. Circulation. 2005;112:1266-73.8.Korantzopoulos P, Kolettis TM, Galaris D, Goudevenos JA.The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis and per-petuation of atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 2007;115:135-43.9.Stroup DF, Berlin JA, Morton SC, et al. Meta-analysis ofobservational studies in epidemiology: a proposal for report-ing. Meta-analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology(MOOSE) group. JAMA. 2000;283:2008-12.10.Stang A. Critical evaluation of the Newcastle-Ottawa scalefor the assessment of the quality of nonrandomized studiesin meta-analyses. Eur J Epidemiol. 2010;25:603-5.11.Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuringinconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327:557-60.12.Sterne JA, Egger M. Funnel plots for detecting bias in meta-analysis: guidelines on choice of axis. J Clin Epidemiol.2001;54:1046-55.13.Ahlehoff O, Gislason GH, Jorgensen CH, et al. Psoriasis andrisk of atrial fibrillation and ischaemic stroke: a DanishNationwide Cohort Study. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2054-64.
14.Bang CN, Okin PM, Kober L, et al. Psoriasis is associatedwith subsequent atrial fibrillation in hypertensive patientswith left ventricular hypertrophy: the Losartan Interventionfor endpoint study. J Hypertens. 2014;32:667-72.15.Armstrong AW, Azizi S, Wu J, et al. Psoriasis, electrocardio-graphic characteristics, and incidence of atrial fibrillation.Arch Dermatol Res. 2013;305:891-7.16.Parisi R, Rutter MK, Lunt M, et al. Psoriasis and the risk ofmajor cardiovascular events: cohort study using the clinicalpractice research datalink. J Invest Dermatol. 2015;135:2189-97.17.Marini C, De Santis F, Sacco S, et al. Contribution of atrialfibrillation to incidence and outcome of ischemic stroke:results from a population-based study. Stroke. 2005;36:1115-19.18.Prodanovich S, Kirsner RS, Kravetz JD, et al. Association ofpsoriasis with coronary artery, cerebrovascular, and periph-eralvasculardiseasesandmortality.ArchDermatol.2009;145:700-3.19.Kimball AB, Robinson D Jr, Wu Y, et al. Cardiovascular dis-ease and risk factors among psoriasis patients in two UShealthcare databases, 2001-2002. Dermatology (Basel). 2008;217:27-37.20.Gelfand JM, Dommasch ED, Shin DB, et al. The risk of strokein patients with psoriasis. J Invest Dermatol. 2009;129:2411-18.21.Brauchli YB, Jick SS, Miret M, Meier CR. Psoriasis and risk ofincident myocardial infarction, stroke or transient ischaemicattack: an inception cohort study with a nested case-controlanalysis. Br J Dermatol. 2009;160:1048-56.22.Markham T, Mullan R, Golden-Mason L, et al. Resolution ofendothelial activation and down-regulation of Tie2 receptorinpsoriaticskinafterinfliximabtherapy.JAmAcadDermatol. 2006;54:1003-12.23.Prodanovich S, Ma F, Taylor JR, et al. Methotrexate reducesincidence of vascular diseases in veterans with psoriasis orrheumatoid arthritis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;52:262-7.24.Shirinsky IV, Shirinsky VS. Efficacy of simvastatin in plaquepsoriasis: a pilot study. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;57:529-31.
AppendixMEDLINE1 psoriasis.mp. or exp Psoriasis/2 psoria.mp. [mp  1/4 title, abstract, original title, name of sub-stance word, subject heading word, keyword heading word, proto-col supplementary concept word, rare disease supplementaryconcept word, unique identifier]3 1 or 24 Atrial Fibrillation.mp. or exp Atrial Fibrillation/5 auricular fibrillation.tw.6 atrium fibrillation.tw.7 4 or 5 or 68 3 and 7EMBASE((('atrialfibrillation'/expor'atrialfibrillation')or(atrialor'atrium'/exp or auricular and fibrillat)) and (('psoriasis'/exp and[embase]/lim) or (psoria and [embase]/lim))) and [embase]/limnot [medline]/lim410S. UPALA ET AL.Copyright of Journal of Dermatological Treatment is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltdand its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv withoutthe copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, oremail articles for individual use.
