  CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................24Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1: Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 1: Clinicalseverity score at 0 to 24 hours afer treatment..................................................................................................................................Analysis 1.2. Comparison 1: Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 2: Clinicalseverity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatment................................................................................................................................Analysis 1.3. Comparison 1: Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 3:Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of discharge.....................................................................................................................Analysis 2.1. Comparison 2: Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome1: Duration of hospital stay..................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 2.2. Comparison 2: Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome2: Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatment...............................................................................................................
Analysis 3.1. Comparison 3: Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline + epinephrinefor acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 1: Duration of hospital stay........................................................................................Analysis 3.2. Comparison 3: Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline + epinephrinefor acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 2: Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hour afer treatment..........................................Analysis 3.3. Comparison 3: Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline + epinephrinefor acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 3: Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hour afer treatment.........................................CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................39DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................40SOURCES OF SUPPORT...............................................................................................................................................................................40DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................40CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up totwo years of ageSudha Chandelia1, Dinesh Kumar2, Neelima Chadha3, Nishant Jaiswal41Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care, PGIMER and Dr. RML Hospital, New Delhi, India. 2Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department ofPediatrics, PGIMER, Delhi, India. 3PGIMER Library, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India. 4ICMR Advanced Centre for Evidence-Based Child Health,Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, IndiaContact address: Sudha Chandelia, Editorial group: Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group.Publication status and date: New, published in Issue 12, 2020.Citation: Chandelia S, Kumar D, Chadha N, Jaiswal N. Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years ofage. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2020, Issue 12. Art. No.: CD012965. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012965.pub2.Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TAcute bronchiolitis is a significant burden on children, their families and healthcare facilities. It mostly afects children younger thantwo years of age. Treatment involves adequate hydration, humidified oxygen supplementation, and nebulisation of medications, such assalbutamol, epinephrine, and hypertonic saline. The efectiveness of magnesium sulphate for acute bronchiolitis is unclear.ObjectivesTo assess the efects of magnesium sulphate in acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age.We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, LILACS, CINAHL, and two trials registries to 30 April 2020. We contacted trial authors to identifyadditional studies. We searched conference proceedings and reference lists of retrieved articles. Unpublished and published studies wereeligible for inclusion.Selection criteria
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs, comparing magnesium sulphate, alone or with another treatment, with placebo oranother treatment, in children up to two years old with acute bronchiolitis. Primary outcomes were time to recovery, mortality, and adverseevents. Secondary outcomes were duration of hospital stay, clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afer treatment,pulmonary function test, hospital readmission within 30 days, duration of mechanical ventilation, and duration of intensive care unit stay.We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. We used GRADE methods to assess the certainty of the evidence.Main resultsWe included four RCTs (564 children). One study received funding from a hospital and one from a university; two studies did not reportfunding sources. Comparator interventions difered among all four trials. Studies were conducted in Qatar, Turkey, Iran, and India. Weassessed two studies to be at an overall low risk of bias, and two to be at unclear risk of bias, overall. The certainty of the evidence for alloutcomes and comparisons was very low except for one: hospital re-admission rate within 30 days of discharge for magnesium sulphateversus placebo. None of the studies measured time to recovery, duration of mechanical ventilation, duration of intensive care unit stay,or pulmonary function.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsThere were no events of mortality or adverse efects for magnesium sulphate compared with placebo (1 RCT, 160 children). The efects ofmagnesium sulphate on clinical severity are uncertain (at 0 to 24 hours: mean diference (MD) on the Wang score 0.13, 95% confidenceinterval (CI) -0.28 to 0.54; and at 25 to 48 hours: MD on the Wang score -0.42, 95% CI -0.84 to -0.00). Magnesium sulphate may increasehospital re-admission rate within 30 days of discharge (risk ratio (RR) 3.16, 95% CI 1.20 to 8.27; 158 children; low-certainty evidence).None of our primary outcomes were measured for magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline (1 RCT, 220 children). Efectswere uncertain on the duration of hospital stay in days (MD 0.00, 95% CI -0.28 to 0.28), and on clinical severity on the Respiratory DistressAssessment Instrument (RDAI) score at 25 to 48 hours (MD 0.10, 95% CI -0.39 to 0.59).There were no events of mortality or adverse efects for magnesium sulphate, with or without salbutamol, compared with salbutamol (1RCT, 57 children). Efects on the duration of hospital stay were uncertain (magnesium sulphate: 24 hours (95% CI 25.8 to 47.4), magnesiumsulphate + salbutamol: 20 hours (95% CI 15.3 to 39.0), and salbutamol: 24 hours (95% CI 23.4 to 76.9)).
None of our primary outcomes were measured for magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline +epinephrine (1 RCT,120 children). Efects were uncertain for the duration of hospital stay in hours (MD -0.40, 95% CI -3.94 to 3.14), and forRDAI scores (0 to 24 hours: MD -0.20, 95% CI -1.06 to 0.66; and 25 to 48 hours: MD -0.90, 95% CI -1.75 to -0.05).Authors' conclusionsThere is insuficient evidence to establish the eficacy and safety of magnesium sulphate for treating children up to two years of age withacute bronchiolitis. No evidence was available for time to recovery, duration of mechanical ventilation and intensive care unit stay, orpulmonary function. There was no information about adverse events for some comparisons. Well-designed RCTs to assess the efects ofmagnesium sulphate for children with acute bronchiolitis are needed. Important outcomes, such as time to recovery and adverse eventsshould be measured.P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YMagnesium sulphate for treating children up to two years old with bronchiolitisReview questionWe investigated the efectiveness and safety of magnesium sulphate for treating children up to two years old with acute bronchiolitis.Background
Acute bronchiolitis is caused by a virus, and mostly afects children up to two years old. This condition blocks small airways in the lungs,causing coughing, wheezing, and breathing dificulties. Usual treatment involves supportive care, which includes providing adequate fluidsand humidified oxygen. Children with bronchiolitis may need intensive care treatment.Search dateEvidence is current to 30 April 2020.We included four studies (564 children) conducted in Qatar, Turkey, Iran, and India. Three studies included children with moderate to severebronchiolitis. Studies compared magnesium sulphate, given via a tube into a vein (intravenous), or as a fine inhaled spray (nebulised),with a dummy treatment (known as a placebo - something that looks like magnesium sulphate treatment), medicines to open the airways(salbutamol or epinephrine), a salt water solution (hypertonic saline), or no treatment.One study received funding from a hospital and one from a university; two studies did not report funding sources.Key resultsThere was not enough evidence to know if intravenous or nebulised magnesium sulphate, either alone or combined with other treatments,improved bronchiolitis outcomes in children up to two years old. We could not determine if magnesium sulphate reduced deaths,unexpected medical problems during treatment, time spent in hospital, or illness severity (based on doctors' clinical assessment scores).Time taken to recovery was not measured.Certainty of the evidence
Overall, we are very uncertain of the results.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings 1.   Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acute bronchiolitis in childrenMagnesium sulphate versus placebo for acute bronchiolitis in childrenSettings: short stay unit, paediatric emergency departmentComparison: placeboPlaceboMagnesium sulphateTime to recovery-----Outcome not mea-suredMortalitySee commentSee commentNot estimable160(1 RCT)See commentTrial authors con-firmed there wereno deaths in eithergroup (personalcommunication)Adverse eventsSee commentSee commentNot estimable160(1 RCT)See commentNeither group re-ported adverse ef-fects, such as ap-noea, cyanosis, orhaemodynamic in-stabilityDuration of hospital stayGeometric meantime to dischargewas 25.3 hours in theplacebo group.Geometric mean time to dis-charge was 24.1 hours in themagnesium sulphate group.
Not estimable160(1 RCT)See commentResults were tak-en directly from thepublished report.The mean CSS at 24 hoursin the magnesium sulphategroup was 0.13 points high-er (0.28 lower to 0.54 higher)   Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Clinical severity score (CSS)The mean CSS at 48 hoursin the magnesium sulphategroup was 0.42 points lower(0.84 lower to 0)very lowa (re-admissions were reported at14 days)lowb *The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) isbased on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: confidence interval; RR: risk ratio; MD: mean difference; SD: standard deviation; RCT: randomised controlled trialaWe downgraded the quality of the evidence to very low for indirectness and very serious imprecision (1 study, small sample size, wide confidence intervals).bWe downgraded the quality of the evidence to low for indirectness and serious imprecision (1 study, small sample size).  Summary of findings 2.   Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline for acute bronchiolitis in childrenMagnesium sulphate versus hypertonic saline for acute bronchiolitis in childrenSettings: single-centre, emergency department, paediatric intensive care unit and wardsIntervention: magnesium sulphateComparison: hypertonic salineAssumed riskCorresponding riskRelative effect(95% CI)No of Partici-pants(studies)Certainty ofthe evidence(GRADE)CommentsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Hypertonic salineMagnesium sulphateDuration of hospital stayThe mean (SD) dura-tion of hospital stay inthe hypertonic salinegroup was 3.2 days(1.0)The mean duration of hos-pital stay in the magne-sium sulphate group was3.2 days (0.28 lower to0.28 higher)(1 RCT)very lowa Clinical severity score (CSS)measured at 0 to 24 hoursafter treatmentClinical severity score (CSS)(RDAI score; range 0 to 17; higher =poorer outcomes)measured at 25 to 48 hoursafter treatmentThe mean (SD) CSS at48 hours in the hyper-tonic saline group was3.7 points (1.8)The mean CSS at 48 hoursin the magnesium sul-phate group was 0.10points higher (0.39 lowerto 0.59 higher)very lowa
 Hospital re-admission within 30days of discharge-----Outcome notmeasured*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) isbased on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; SD: standard deviation; RCT: randomised controlled trial; RADI: respiratory distress assessment instrumentGRADE Working Group grades of evidenceHigh quality. Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality. Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality. Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality. We are very uncertain about the estimate.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.aWe downgraded the quality of the evidence to very low for indirectness and very serious imprecision (1 study, small sample size).  Summary of findings 3.   Magnesium sulphate or magnesium sulphate + salbutamol compared with salbutamol for acute bronchiolitis in childrenMagnesium sulphate or magnesium sulphate + salbutamol versus salbutamol for acute bronchiolitis in childrenPatient or population: children from 1 month to 24 months old with acute bronchiolitis
Settings: single-centre, short-stay unit, paediatric emergency departmentComparison: salbutamolIllustrative comparative risks* (95% CI)Assumed riskCorresponding riskOutcomesSalbutamolMagnesium sulphate ormagnesium sulphate +salbutamolRelative effect(95% CI)No of Partici-pants(studies)Certainty ofthe evidence(GRADE)CommentsTime to recovery-----Outcome not measuredMortalitySee commentSee commentNot estimable56(1 RCT)a-No deaths occurred in anyof the groups (personalcommunication)Adverse eventsSee commentSee commentNot estimable56(1 RCT)a-There were no instances ofadverse effects, such as hy-potension, arrhythmias, orloss of deep tendon reflex-es reported in any of thegroups.Duration of hospital stayThe mean du-ration of hos-pital stay inthe salbutamolgroup was 24hours (95% CI23.4 to 76.9).The mean duration of hos-pital stay in the magne-sium sulphate group was 24hours (95% CI 25.8 to 47.4).The mean duration of hos-pital stay for the magne-sium sulphate + salbutamolgroup was 20 hours (95% CI15.3 to 39.0).Not estimable56(1 RCT)a-Results were taken directlyfrom the published report.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Clinical severity score (CSS)measured at 0 to 24 hoursafter treatmentClinical severity score (CSS)(Wang score; range 0 to 12; high-er = poorer outcome)
-----Outcome not measured-----Outcome not measuredGRADE Working Group grades of evidenceHigh quality. Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality. Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality. Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality. We are very uncertain about the estimate.a3-arm trial: magnesium sulphate group (19 children), magnesium sulphate plus salbutamol (19 children), salbutamol (18 children)  Summary of findings 4.   Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline + epinephrineMagnesium sulphate + epinephrine versus no treatment or normal saline + epinephrinePatient or population: children up to 12 months old with acute bronchiolitisSettings: 3 paediatric departments of 3 hospitalsIntervention: magnesium sulphate + epinephrineComparison: no treatment or normal saline + epinephrineNo of Partici-pantsCertainty ofthe evidenceCommentsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Assumed riskCorresponding riskno treatment or normalsaline + epinephrineMagnesium sulphate + epineph-rine(studies)(GRADE)Time to recovery-----Outcome notmeasuredMortality-----Outcome notmeasuredAdverse events-----Outcome notmeasuredDuration of hospital stayThe mean (SD) durationof hospital stay in theepinephrine group was84.7 hours (10.1)The mean (SD) duration of hospitalstay for the magnesium sulphate +epinephrine group was 0.40 hoursless (3.94 lower to 3.14 higher)very lowa measured at 0 to 24 hoursafter treatment
The mean CSS at 24 hours in themagnesium sulphate + epinephrinegroup was 0.20 points lower (1.06lower to 0.66 higher)very lowa Clinical severity score(CSS)(RDAI score; range 0 to 17;higher = poorer outcomes)measured 25 to 48 hoursafter treatmentThe mean CSS at 48 hours in themagnesium sulphate + epinephrinegroup was 0.90 points lower (1.75lower to 0.05 lower)very lowaHigher valueindicates pooroutcomeHospital re-admission with-in 30 days of discharge-----Outcome notmeasured*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) isbased on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: Confidence interval; MD: mean difference; SD: standard deviation; RCT: randomised controlled trialGRADE Working Group grades of evidenceHigh quality. Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Moderate quality. Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality. Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality. We are very uncertain about the estimate.aWe downgraded the evidence to very low for indirectness and very serious imprecision (1 study, small sample size). CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsB A C K G R O U N D
Description of the conditionAcute bronchiolitis is a lower respiratory tract disease, whichmostly afects children up to two years of age. Many viralinfections can result in bronchiolitis; respiratory syncytial virusis the most common aetiological agent, and afects more than60% of children with bronchiolitis (Calvo 2010; Hasegawa 2014b;Mansbach 2012b). Infection induces inflammation of the lowerairways causing bronchiolar wall oedema, resulting in narrowingof the distal airways. Further tapering of the lumen of theseairways occurs due to increased secretions and cellular debris.Bronchiolitis may cause significant airway obstruction via thebronchioles, leading to the need for mechanical ventilation insome circumstances. Irrespective of the causative virus, clinicalpresentation is typical; pathological investigation is not requiredfor diagnosis. The diagnosis and management of bronchiolitisvary in diferent regions of the world. The American Academy ofPediatrics, together with the European Respiratory Society definedbronchiolitis as the first episode of wheezing preceded by "aconstellation of clinical symptoms and signs suggestive of a viralupper respiratory prodrome, followed by increased respiratoryefort in children less than two years of age" (AAP Subcommittee2006). In the UK, a Delphi consensus exercise defined bronchiolitisas "a seasonal viral illness characterised by fever, nasal discharge,and dry, wheezy cough. On examination, there are fine inspiratorycrackles, a high-pitched expiratory wheeze, or both" (Lakhanpaul2002). In the UK, the presence of a wheeze is not mandatoryfor diagnosis. Most European countries restrict the diagnosis ofbronchiolitis to children up to the age of 12 months. We applied theAAP Subcommittee 2006 definition for this review. Some risk factorsassociated with bronchiolitis severity are low socioeconomicstatus, male gender, prematurity, prenatal exposure to steroids,and maternal smoking (Lanari 2015; Murray 2014).
Acute bronchiolitis imposes a significant burden on healthcarefacilities. Increased rates of bronchiolitis-related emergencydepartment visits (Carroll 2008; Hasegawa 2014a), andhospitalisations have been reported (Green 2016; Rivera-Sepulveda2017). Reports of bronchiolitis range from 26.5% of infants youngerthan 12 months to 16.4% of children younger than two years(Carroll 2008; Munoz-Quiles 2016). It has been estimated that 17%of children with bronchiolitis who are admitted to hospital aretreated in intensive care units (Mansbach 2012a). Between 42% and75% of these children are treated using both invasive and non-invasive mechanical ventilation techniques (Flores-Gonzalez 2017;Mansbach 2012a). Previously, the percentage of children reportedto die from bronchiolitis was 4.2% (Shay 2001). Recent studies showa mortality rate of 0.24% in hospitalised children (Munoz-Quiles2016). However, the number of children with advanced disease hasincreased and consequently, healthcare costs have also increased(Hasegawa 2013).Description of the intervention
No specific treatment is currently available for acute bronchiolitis.Treatment involves supportive care, including adequate hydrationand humidified oxygen supplementation. Various treatmentoptions have been proposed, but only nebulised epinephrine andhypertonic saline have been shown to be useful (Hartling 2011;Zhang 2017).Magnesium is the active component of its sulphate salt ofmagnesium, sulphur, and oxygen, and has many diferentpharmacological actions. Magnesium is an important cofactor ofmany enzymes involved in biological reactions, and is presentin tissues, including the brain, smooth muscles of the uterus,bronchioles, and the gastrointestinal tract (Swaminathan 2003).It has many therapeutic uses, such as controlling convulsions,preventing preterm labour, treating constipation, controllingtachyarrhythmias, and reversing bronchoconstriction in statusasthmaticus (Schwalfenberg 2017). The action of magnesium onthe bronchioles results in dilation of the airways by severalmechanisms. Use of magnesium sulphate for children withbronchiolitis is based on its treatment efectiveness for adults (Kew2014), and children with asthma (Grifiths 2016).
Treatment with magnesium sulphate may reduce hospitaladmissions of children with acute asthma presenting to theemergency department; evidence on the eficacy of magnesiumsulphate is required for children with bronchiolitis. Magnesiumsulphate can be administered intravenously or nebulised. Thedose of intravenous magnesium sulphate for a bronchodilationefect used in trials ranges from 25 mg/kg/dose to 100 mg/kg/dose (maximum 2 g; (Alansari 2017; Ciarallo 1996; Scarfone2000)). Nebulisation doses range from 40 mg/kg (Modaresi 2015),to 150 mg per dose (Kose 2014). Common adverse efects ofmagnesium sulphate therapy include hypotension (Ciarallo 1996;Goodacre 2013; Scarfone 2000), cardiac arrhythmias (Goodacre2013; Lu 2000), and respiratory depression (Lu 2000; Mahajan2004). Respiratory depression can be monitored by examining deeptendon reflex; loss of this reflex is the first sign of impending toxicity(Lu 2000).How the intervention might workAcute bronchiolitis results in the narrowing of small distal airways,causing airflow obstruction. Treatment to dilate airways may proveuseful for children with acute bronchiolitis. Several ways thatmagnesium sulphate may act on the bronchiolar wall, resultingin bronchodilation, have been proposed. Magnesium sulphate hasbeen shown to dilate bronchial muscle in animal studies (Hirota1999; Kumasaka 1996; Spivey 1990), and may result in bronchialsmooth muscle relaxation by blocking the voltage-dependentcalcium channels, preventing calcium influx (Gourgoulianis 2004).Magnesium sulphate decreases acetylcholine accumulation atnerve endings, further preventing bronchoconstriction (Castillo1954). Magnesium sulphate may ofer a safe, widely available, andlow-cost therapy to relieve airway obstruction in children withbronchiolitis.Why it is important to do this review
Several Cochrane Reviews have investigated treatment optionsfor children with acute bronchiolitis, including nebuliseddeoxyribonuclease (Enriquez 2012), heliox inhalation (Liet 2015),bronchodilators other than magnesium sulphate (Gadomski 2014),nebulised epinephrine (Hartling 2011), nebulised hypertonic saline(Zhang 2017), and steroids (Fernandes 2013). However, none ofthese interventions have been adopted as treatment. The roleof magnesium sulphate therapy for bronchiolitis has not beenreviewed previously. This review complements other CochraneReviews, to achieve consensus on treatment for children with acutebronchiolitis.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsO B J E C T I V E STo assess the efects of magnesium sulphate in acute bronchiolitisin children up to two years of age.
M E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesIn the protocol we planned to include randomised controlled trials(RCTs) and non-RCTs, as we were expecting to identify few RCTs. Weincluded RCTs only, as we did not identify any non-RCTs.Types of participantsWe included children up to two years of age, diagnosed with acutebronchiolitis on clinical assessment, irrespective of confirmation ofviral aetiology, presenting to emergency departments, outpatientdepartments, admitted to hospital or intensive care units. We didnot exclude studies enrolling children with comorbidities, highrisk factors, or both. Comorbidities and high risk factors for thepopulation of interest for this review included children youngerthan 12 weeks, preterm birth at 34 weeks' gestation or less,histories of diagnosed chronic lung or congenital heart disease, orimmunodeficiency.Types of interventionsWe compared magnesium sulphate (any dose, route ofadministration, or timing) alone, or as an adjunct to conventionaltreatments including:
1. nebulised hypertonic saline;2. nebulised epinephrine; or3. nebulised bronchodilators.The possible comparisons were:1. magnesium sulphate compared with placebo;2. magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline;3. magnesium sulphate compared with epinephrine;4. magnesium sulphate compared with conventionalbronchodilator;5. magnesium sulphate + bronchodilator compared with notreatment or normal saline + the same bronchodilator;6. magnesium sulphate + hypertonic saline compared with notreatment or normal saline + hypertonic saline;7. magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with notreatment or normal saline + epinephrineTypes of outcome measuresWe added the primary outcome time to recovery, as it is a person-centred, clinically important outcome, likely to be modified by thetreatment. In the protocol, the primary outcome, clinical severityscore, had four components: clinical severity score measured usingany validated scoring system, duration of mechanical ventilation,duration of hospital stay, or duration of intensive care unit stay.We moved clinical severity score to the secondary outcomes, andseparated the four components into four secondary outcomes asthese are diferent independent outcomes with diferent meaning.We specified time points of assessment of the clinical severityscore.1. Time to recovery2. Mortality3. Adverse efects of magnesium sulphate treatment1. Duration of hospital stay2. Clinical severity score (at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afertreatment) measured using any validated scoring system3. Pulmonary function test4. Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of discharge5. Duration of mechanical ventilation6. Duration of intensive care unit stay
Electronic searchesWe searched the following databases: Cochrane Central Registerof Controlled Trials (CENTRAL 2020, Issue 3), in the CochraneLibrary, which includes the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Group'sSpecialised Register (searched 30 April 2020); MEDLINE via PubMed(1966 to 30 April 2020); Embase (1980 to 30 April 2020); LILACS (LatinAmerican and Caribbean Health Science Information database;1982 to 30 April 2020), and CINAHL (1992 to 30 April 2020; Appendix1). We did not apply any language or publication restrictions. Wealso searched ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health OrganizationInternational Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP; searched 30April 2020).Searching other resourcesWe checked reference lists of all primary studies and review articlesfor additional references. We contacted experts in the field toidentify additional, unpublished material.Data collection and analysisSelection of studiesTwo  review authors (SC, DK) independently screened titles andabstracts of studies identified as a result of the search, for potentialinclusion in the review. We retrieved full-text study reports ofstudies deemed potentially eligible, and two review authors (SC,DK) independently screened the full text to identify studies forinclusion, and record reasons for exclusion of ineligible studies. Weresolved any disagreements through discussion, or by consulting athird review author (NC), if necessary. We identified and excludedduplicates, and collated multiple reports of the same study so thateach study, rather than each report, was the unit of interest in thereview. We recorded the selection process in a PRISMA flow diagram(Figure 1), and 'Characteristics of excluded studies' table (Moher2009). 
Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Data extraction and managementWe used a data collection form for study characteristics andoutcome data, which was piloted on at least one study in thereview. One review author (SC) extracted the following studycharacteristics from the included studies.1. Methods: study design, total duration of study, details of any run-in period, number of study centres and location, study setting,withdrawals, and date of study2. Participants: N, mean age, age range, gender, severity ofcondition, diagnostic criteria, baseline lung function, inclusioncriteria and exclusion criteria3. Interventions: intervention, comparison, concomitantmedications, and excluded medications4. Outcomes: primary and secondary outcomes specified andcollected, and time points reported5. Notes: funding for trial, and notable conflicts of interest for trialauthors.
Two review authors (SC, DK) independently extracted outcomedata from the included studies. We noted if outcome data werenot reported in a usable way in the 'Characteristics of includedstudies' tables. We resolved any disagreements by consensus. Onereview author (SC) entered data into the Review Manager 5 file(Review Manager 2014). We double-checked that data were enteredcorrectly by having a second review author (DK) spot-check studycharacteristics for accuracy against the trial report.Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesTwo review authors (SC, DK) independently assessed risk of bias foreach study, using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011). We resolved anydisagreements by discussion, if necessary. We assessed the risk ofbias according to the following domains.1. Allocation (selection bias)2. Blinding (performance bias and detection bias)3. Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)4. Selective outcome reporting (reporting bias)5. Other biasWe graded each potential source of bias as high, low, or unclear, andprovided a quote from the study report, together with a justificationfor our judgement in the 'Risk of bias' table. We summarised the'Risk of bias' judgements across diferent studies for each of thedomains listed. We considered blinding separately for diferentkey outcomes where necessary. When information on risk of biasrelated to unpublished data, or correspondence with a trialist, wenoted this in the 'Risk of bias' table.When considering treatment efects, we took into account the riskof bias for the studies that contributed to that outcome.Measures of treatment efectWe entered outcome data for each study into the Data and analysestables in Review Manager 5 to calculate the treatment efects(Review Manager 2014). We used risk ratio (RR) for dichotomous
Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsoutcome, such as hospital readmission rate. We did not analyseadverse efects and mortality, as no events were reported.For continuous outcomes, we calculated mean diference (MD),as we only identified one study for analysis. We planned to usestandardised mean diference (SMD) if diferent scales were used,but we did not find such data. We confirmed that higher scoresfor continuous outcomes had the same meaning for the particularoutcome, explained the direction, and reported if the directionswere reversed, when required. We reported all pooled efect sizeswith 95% confidence intervals (CIs).We did not conduct meta-analyses, as the treatments were notsimilar enough to pool.Unit of analysis issuesThe unit of analysis was the child. For studies with more than twoarms, we included the relevant arms for analysis, and excludedother arms. We planned to combine intervention groups to make asingle pair comparison, but we did not find such data.Dealing with missing dataWe contacted investigators to verify key study characteristics, andto obtain missing numerical outcome data, when needed (e.g.when a study was identified as abstract only or a diferent format ofreporting was used by the authors). We did not conduct sensitivityanalyses, as either missing data were not likely to introduce bias, ordata were insuficient.Assessment of heterogeneityWe did not measure heterogeneity, as only one study was availablefor each comparison.Assessment of reporting biasesWe did not create a funnel plot to explore possible small-study andpublication biases, as we did not include more than 10 trials for anycomparison.
Data synthesisWe planned to pool data from studies that we judged to be clinicallyhomogeneous, using Review Manager 5 (Review Manager 2014). Ifmore than one eligible study provided usable data in any singlecomparison, we planned to perform a meta-analysis. We did notfind suficient data for pooling or meta-analysing.We planned to use the random-efects model to analyse data, as weexpected the included studies would difer in terms of interventiondose, route of delivery, and study location. We used the fixed-efectmodel to calculate efect size and 95% CIs, as we identified andincluded only one study for each comparison.Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneityWe were unable to conduct analyses for many outcomes, due tothe lack of data. Those outcomes and comparisons are described inTable 1. We did not perform any of the planned subgroup analysesdue to insuficient data. Only one study was available for eachcomparison.Sensitivity analysisWe did not conduct any sensitivity analyses due to insuficient data.Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of theevidence
We created 'Summary of findings' tables using the followingoutcomes: time to recovery, mortality, adverse events, durationof hospital stay, clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours and at25 to 48 hours afer treatment, and hospital readmission ratewithin 30 days of discharge. We created a single 'Summary offindings' table for the comparisons, Magnesium sulphate comparedwith conventional bronchodilator, and Magnesium sulphate +bronchodilator compared with no treatment or normal saline +same bronchodilator. The intervention groups in both of thesecomparisons come from a single trial (Kose 2014). We usedthe five GRADE considerations (study limitations, consistencyof efect, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias) toassess the certainty of the body of evidence, as it related tothe studies that contributed data to the meta-analyses for theprespecified outcomes (Atkins 2004). We used methods andrecommendations described in Section 8.5 and Chapter 12 of theCochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins2011), and GRADEpro GDT sofware (GRADEpro GDT). We justifiedall decisions to downgrade the quality of the evidence in footnotes,and provided comments to aid readers' understanding of thereview, when necessary.R E S U L T SDescription of studiesSee Characteristics of included studies  and Characteristics ofexcluded studies tables for details.
Results of the searchWe searched five databases, and retrieved 1200 records to 30 April2020 (Electronic searches). Searches of other resources, internet,and expert contacts identified 13 additional records that appearedto meet the inclusion criteria, bringing our total yield to 1213records. Afer removal of duplicates, we assessed 904 records,based on information presented in the title and abstract, andremoved 891 records. We obtained the full text for 13 records. Weexcluded three studies, and identified two ongoing studies. Weincluded four studies, reported in eight publications (Figure 1). Wescreened the reference lists of the included publications, but didnot identify any additional randomised controlled trials (RCTs).We sought additional information from study authors when datawere not reported in a usable way, or were not reported. Two studyauthors responded and provided additional data (Alansari 2017;Kose 2014), one did not respond (Modaresi 2015), and anothercould not be contacted (Priya 2018). The authors of two excludedstudies could not provide additional data (Gupta 2015; Rady 2018).Included studiesWe did not identify any non-RCTs comparing magnesiumsulphate alone, or in addition to conventional treatments, withany interventions. We included four RCTs, reported in eightpublications. Three studies were published as full-text papers inpeer reviewed journals (Alansari 2017; Kose 2014; Modaresi 2015);one was a Master's thesis, posted on a university website (Priya2018). Three RCTs were parallel-arm designs; one included threeparallel arms (Kose 2014).Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsThe included studies were conducted in Qatar (Alansari 2017),Turkey (Kose 2014), Iran (Modaresi 2015), and India (Priya 2018).Three were single-centre studies, and one was a three-centre study(Modaresi 2015). Three studies enrolled children from emergencyrooms; one study did not specify the setting (Modaresi 2015).Population
Two studies included children up to 12 months old (Modaresi2015; Priya 2018), one study included children up to 18 months(Alansari 2017), and one study included children from 1 month to24 months old (Kose 2014). Three studies excluded children with ahistory of premature birth (Alansari 2017; Kose 2014; Priya 2018);two studies excluded children with atopy (allergy) history or familyhistory of asthma (Kose 2014; Modaresi 2015). Two studies used theWang score (range 0 to 12; higher scores indicate increased illnessseverity) for clinical severity scoring, and included children whosescores were >= 4 (moderate to severe bronchiolitis; (Alansari 2017;Kose 2014; Wang 1992)). Two studies used the Respiratory DistressAssessment Instrument (RDAI; range 0 to 17; higher scores meanincreased illness severity; (Lowell 1987)). One included childrenwhose scores were at least 5 (moderate to severe bronchiolitis;(Modaresi 2015)). Severity of illness was unclear in Priya 2018.Comparator interventions difered amongst all four trials: Alansari2017 compared magnesium sulphate with placebo; Kose 2014compared it with a bronchodilator (salbutamol); Modaresi 2015compared magnesium sulphate in combination with epinephrinewith epinephrine alone ; and Priya 2018 compared magnesiumsulphate with hypertonic saline. Three studies administered thenebulised form of magnesium sulphate to children, and oneadministered intravenous magnesium sulphate (Alansari 2017).Magnesium sulphate was given as a single intravenous dose inAlansari 2017, as two nebulised doses in Kose 2014, and as multipledoses until discharge of the child in two studies (Modaresi 2015;Priya 2018).Study funding sourcesAlansari 2017 was hospital-sponsored, and Modaresi 2015 wasfunded by the Child Growth and Development Research Center,Isfahan University of Medical Sciences. Two studies did not mentionsources of funding (Kose 2014; Priya 2018).
Excluded studiesWe excluded three studies (Gupta 2015; Pruikkonen 2018; Rady2018).All three studies included diferent populations; study authors wereunable to provide specific outcome data for children up to twoyears old, with the first episode of wheezing.Gupta 2015 was available as a conference abstract. The trialenrolled children, of unspecified ages, with first or secondepisodes of moderate to severe acute bronchiolitis. We contactedthe trial authors to request data on children with their firstwheezing episode, but additional data were not available. Twostudies examined a diferent population. Pruikkonen 2018 includedchildren aged six months to four years, with more than one episodeof wheezing. Rady 2018 included children with wheezy chest of allcauses, between the ages of 2 months and 12 years; the trial authorswere unable to provide details of outcome on children up to twoyears old.Studies awaiting classificationWe did not identify any studies awaiting classification.Ongoing studiesWe identified two ongoing trials being conducted in India. Both areplacebo controlled, two parallel-arm trials. CTRI/2017/02/007919plans to enrol 104 children from 2 to 12 months old.CTRI/2018/06/014400 plans to enrol 50 children from 1 to24 months old. The intervention drug in both studies isthe nebulised form of magnesium sulphate, but doses andfrequency of administration difer. CTRI/2017/02/007919 prescribesthree doses of magnesium sulphate at one hour intervals;CTRI/2018/06/014400) prescribes magnesium sulphate every 4hours over 24 hours (6 doses). The primary outcome, bronchiolitisseverity, is measured with the RDAI score in CTRI/2017/02/007919,and the Wang bronchiolitis severity score in CTRI/2018/06/014400.See Characteristics of ongoing studies.
Risk of bias in included studies Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAlansari 2017+?+++Kose 2014??++?Modaresi 2015+++++Priya 2018??++?  Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAllocation concealment (selection bias)Blinding (performance bias and detection bias): All outcomesIncomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomesSelective reporting (reporting bias)Other biasLow risk of biasUnclear risk of biasHigh risk of bias AllocationWe judged two studies at low risk of bias for selection bias;both provided adequate reporting of sequence generation andallocation (Alansari 2017; Modaresi 2015). Two studies did notprovide adequate information on the method of sequencegeneration, and allocation and we rated them as unclear risk of bias(Kose 2014; Priya 2018).We judged one study, which maintained blinding of investigatorsand parents, at low risk of bias (Modaresi 2015). We judged threestudies as unclear risk of bias, because they did not give detailson how they maintained blinding (Alansari 2017; Kose 2014; Priya2018).We considered all four studies to be at low risk of attrition bias;fewer than two to three children in each intervention group werelost to follow-up or withdrew from three studies (Alansari 2017;Kose 2014; Modaresi 2015); no participant data were missing fromPriya 2018.We considered all included studies to be at a low risk of biasfor selective reporting. Alansari 2017 reported all outcomes asspecified in the protocol. The protocols for the other three studieswere not available, but they reported all outcomes planned in themethods section of the published report. We did not detect anyselective omission of outcomes.
Other potential sources of biasWe judged two studies at low risk of other bias (Alansari 2017;Modaresi 2015). Authors of these trials did not disclose the receiptof any grants, funds, or shares. We considered two trials as unclearrisk of bias (Kose 2014; Priya 2018). These trials did not mentionsources of funding, or conflicts of interest. There was no imbalancein baseline clinical severity scores, or other baseline characteristicsof the children in the included studies. We found nothing to suggestinappropriate administration of study drugs, pre-randomisationadministration of interventions, interim analysis afecting conductof research, or selective reporting of subgroups.Efects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings 1 Magnesium sulphate compared withplacebo for acute bronchiolitis in children; Summary of findings2 Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline for acutebronchiolitis in children; Summary of findings 3 Magnesiumsulphate or magnesium sulphate + salbutamol compared withsalbutamol for acute bronchiolitis in children; Summary offindings 4 Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with notreatment or normal saline + epinephrineComparison 1: magnesium sulphate compared with placeboOne RCT, which enrolled 162 children, compared intravenous (IV)magnesium sulphate with placebo (Summary of findings 1; Alansari2017). They excluded the data for two enrolled children in theanalysis, because one child was immunodeficient, and the otherwas discharged against medical advice. A total of 160 childrenwere analysed for all outcomes except hospital re-admission rate(a secondary outcome), for which data from 158 children wereanalysed.Primary outcomesWe contacted the trial authors, who confirmed there were nodeaths in either group (Alansari 2019).
There were no reported incidences of adverse efects, such asapnoea, cyanosis, or haemodynamic instability in either group.Secondary outcomesAlansari 2017 did not measure simple (arithmetic) mean andstandard deviation (SD), but instead, measured geometric means.Geometric mean is equal to the exponential of the mean of thelog-transformed values. The value of geometric mean is lesser thanthe arithmetic mean. Geometric mean is not much afected bythe skewed distribution of data. We contacted the trial authors torequest simple mean and SD. Although we received a response, thetrial authors did not provide the requested data (Alansari 2019). WeMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
did not calculate arithmetic means from the geometric mean forthis analysis, because there was only one study available for thiscomparison. Geometric mean time until discharge was 24.1 hoursin the magnesium sulphate group and 25.3 hours in the placebogroup.Alansari 2017 reported clinical severity scores for bronchiolitis ata number of time points up to 72 hours post-treatment, using theWang score. The magnesium sulphate group included 78 children,and the placebo group included 82 children at all measurementtime points. Mean bronchiolitis severity scores at baseline were6.85 points (SD 1.30) in the magnesium sulphate group, and 6.97points (SD 1.17) in the placebo group. The study found no statisticaldiferences in clinical severity score at any time point.The mean clinical severity score at 24 hours was 4.68 points(SD 0.94) in the magnesium sulphate group, and 4.55 points (SD1.62) in the placebo group. It is uncertain whether magnesiumsulphate improves clinical severity score at 24 hours (MD 0.13, 95%confidence interval (CI) -0.28 to 0.54; 1 RCT; 160 children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 1.1).The mean clinical severity score at 48 hours was 4.42 points (SD1.08) in the magnesium sulphate group, and 4.84 points (SD 1.57)in the placebo group. It is uncertain whether magnesium sulphatereduces clinical severity score at 48 hours (MD -0.42, 95% CI -0.84to -0.00; 1 RCT; 160 children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis1.2).
This outcome was not measured.Hospital readmission rates within 14 days of discharge wereavailable. Fifeen children in the magnesium sulphate groupand five children in the placebo group were readmitted toan infirmary or hospital. Magnesium sulphate may increasehospital readmissions amongst children up to two years old withbronchiolitis, compared with placebo (risk ratio (RR) 3.16, 95% CI1.20 to 8.27; 1 RCT; 158 children; low-certainty evidence; Analysis1.3).None of the children were mechanically ventilated.The mean duration of intensive care unit stay was 101.00 hours inthe magnesium sulphate group (SD not available; there was onlyone child in the magnesium sulphate group), and 154.37 hours(SD 62.62) in the placebo group. Although the mean duration wasshorter in the magnesium sulphate group, it is uncertain whethermagnesium sulphate reduced duration of intensive care unit staycompared with placebo, due to the small number of participants (1RCT; 160 children; very low-certainty evidence).Comparison 2: magnesium sulphate compared withhypertonic salineOne RCT, which enrolled 220 children, compared nebulisedmagnesium sulphate with hypertonic saline (Summary of findings2; Priya 2018).Primary outcomes1. Time to recoveryThis outcome was not measured.2. Mortality3. Adverse efects of magnesium sulphate treatmentThis outcome was not measured.Secondary outcomes1. Duration of hospital stayThe mean duration of hospital stay was 3.2 days (SD 1.1) in themagnesium sulphate group, and 3.2 days (SD 1.0) in the hypertonicsaline group. It is uncertain whether there is a diference betweenmagnesium sulphate and hypertonic saline on duration of hospitalstay (MD 0.00, 95% CI -0.28 to 0.28; 1 RCT; 220 children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 2.1).2. Clinical severity score (at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afertreatment) measured using any validated scoring system
The study used the RDAI score for clinical severity for bronchiolitis,measured at a number of time points until discharge. Themagnesium sulphate and hypertonic saline groups each included110 children at all time points. Mean bronchiolitis severity scores atbaseline were 8.0 points (SD 1.8) in the magnesium sulphate group,and 7.9 points (SD 1.7) in the hypertonic saline group.Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours afer treatmentThis outcome was not measured.Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentThe mean clinical severity score at 48 hours was 3.8 points (SD1.9) in the magnesium sulphate group, and 3.7 points (SD 1.8) inthe hypertonic saline group. It is uncertain whether magnesiumsulphate improves clinical severity score at 48 hours (MD 0.10, 95%CI -0.39 to 0.59; 1 RCT; 220 children; very low-certainty evidence;Analysis 2.2).3. Pulmonary function testThis outcome was not measured.4. Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of dischargeThis outcome was not measured.5. Duration of mechanical ventilationMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews6. Duration of intensive care unit stay
This outcome was not measured.Comparison 3: magnesium sulphate compared withepinephrineNone of our included trials compared magnesium sulphate withepinephrine.Comparison 4: magnesium sulphate compared withconventional bronchodilatorWe included one RCT, enrolling 57 children, which comparednebulised magnesium sulphate with salbutamol, a conventionalbronchodilator (Summary of findings 3; Kose 2014). One childin the magnesium sulphate group was withdrawn due todeteriorating clinical status. Children were allocated to one ofthree interventional arms: magnesium sulphate (19 children);salbutamol (18 children); and salbutamol + magnesium sulphate(19 children). We used data from two study arms (the magnesiumsulphate group and the salbutamol group, N = 37 children) foranalysis.Primary outcomes1. Time to recoveryThis outcome was not measured.
2. MortalityThe trial authors confirmed that no deaths occurred in either group(Kose 2019).3. Adverse efects of magnesium sulphate treatmentSecondary outcomes1. Duration of hospital stayThe trial authors did not provide the SD for duration of hospital stay,but reported the 95% CI (Kose 2019). We did not calculate the SDfrom the 95% CI for this analysis because: 1) there was only a singlestudy available for this comparison; 2) there were very few childrenin either intervention arm; and 3) the 95% CIs were not symmetrical.The mean duration of hospital stay was 24 hours (95% CI 25.8 to47.4) in the magnesium sulphate group, and 24 hours (95% CI 23.4to 76.9) in the salbutamol group. It is uncertain whether magnesiumsulphate has any efect on duration of hospital stay compared withsalbutamol, a conventional bronchodilator (1 RCT; 37 children; verylow-certainty evidence).2. Clinical severity score (at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afertreatment) measured using any validated scoring systemThe study used the Wang score for clinical severity for bronchiolitis,and documented scores at one and four hours afer treatment, butnot at 24 or 48 hours afer treatment.Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours afer treatmentThis outcome was not measured.Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentThis outcome was not measured.3. Pulmonary function test4. Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of dischargeThis outcome was not measured (Kose 2019).5. Duration of mechanical ventilation
6. Duration of intensive care unit stayNo children required admission for intensive care (Kose 2019).Comparison 5: magnesium sulphate + bronchodilatorcompared with no treatment or normal saline + the samebronchodilatorWe included one RCT, enrolling 57 children, whichcompared nebulised magnesium sulphate with a conventionalbronchodilator (salbutamol; Summary of findings 3; Kose 2014).Children were allocated to one of three interventional arms:magnesium sulphate (19 children); salbutamol (18 children); andsalbutamol + magnesium sulphate (19 children). We used data fromtwo study arms (magnesium sulphate + salbutamol group and theno treatment or normal saline + salbutamol group; N = 37 children)for the analyses.Primary outcomes1. Time to recoveryThis outcome was not measured.2. MortalityThe trial authors confirmed there were no deaths in either group(Kose 2019).3. Adverse efects of magnesium sulphate treatmentThere were no reported incidences of adverse efects, such ashypotension, arrhythmias, or loss of deep tendon reflexes in eithergroup (Kose 2019).Secondary outcomes1. Duration of hospital stayThe trial authors did not provide the SD for duration of hospitalstay, but reported the 95% CI. We did not calculate the SD from the95% CI for this analysis because: 1) there was only a single studyavailable for this comparison; 2) there were very few children ineither intervention arm; and 3) the 95% CIs were not symmetrical.The mean duration of hospital stay was 20 hours (95% CI 15.3 to39.0) in the magnesium sulphate + salbutamol group, and 24 hours(95% CI 23.4 to 76.9) in the salbutamol group. Due to very low-certainty evidence, the efect of magnesium sulphate + salbutamolon duration of hospital stay is uncertain.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews2. Clinical severity score (at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afertreatment) measured using any validated scoring systemThe study used the Wang score for clinical severity for bronchiolitis,and documented it at one and four hours afer treatment, but notat 24 or 48 hours afer treatment.Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours afer treatmentThis outcome was not measured.Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentThis outcome was not measured.3. Pulmonary function testThis outcome was not measured (Kose 2019).4. Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of dischargeThis outcome was not measured (Kose 2019).5. Duration of mechanical ventilationNo children were mechanically ventilated (Kose 2019).6. Duration of intensive care unit stay
No children required intensive care admission (Kose 2019).Comparison 6: magnesium sulphate + hypertonic salinecompared with no treatment or normal saline + hypertonicsalineNo trials compared magnesium sulphate + hypertonic saline versusno treatment or normal saline + hypertonic saline.Comparison 7: magnesium sulphate + epinephrine comparedwith no treatment or normal saline + epinephrineWe included one RCT, with 125 enrolled children, which comparedthese interventions (Summary of findings 4; Modaresi 2015). Datafrom 120 children (60 in each group) were available for analysis;three children from the magnesium sulphate group and twochildren from the epinephrine group were lost during follow-up.The trial authors did not respond to our request for additional data.Primary outcomes1.Time to recoveryThis outcome was not measured.2. MortalityThis outcome was not measured.3. Adverse efects of magnesium sulphate treatmentThis outcome was not measured.Secondary outcomes1. Duration of hospital stayThe mean duration of hospital stay was 84.3 hours (SD 9.7) in themagnesium sulphate + epinephrine group, and 84.7 hours (SD 10.1)in the epinephrine group (MD -0.40, 95% CI -3.94 to 3.14; 1 RCT; 120children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 3.1).2. Clinical severity score (at 0 to 24 hours and 25 to 48 hours afertreatment) measured using any validated scoring system
The study used the RDAI score for clinical severity for bronchiolitis,and documented it at a number of time points until discharge.The mean bronchiolitis severity scores at baseline were 11.4 points(SD 2.7) in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group, and 11.0points (SD 2.7) in the epinephrine group.Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours afer treatmentThe mean clinical severity score at 24 hours was 6.4 points (SD 2.6)in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group, and 6.6 points (SD2.2) in the epinephrine group. It is uncertain whether magnesiumsulphate + epinephrine reduces clinical severity score at 24 hourscompared with epinephrine alone (MD -0.20, 95% CI -1.06 to 0.66; 1RCT; 120 children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 3.2).Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentThe mean clinical severity score at 48 hours was 2.8 points (SD 2.0)in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group, and 3.7 points (SD2.7) in the epinephrine group. It is uncertain whether magnesiumsulphate + epinephrine reduces clinical severity score at 48 hourscompared with epinephrine alone (MD -0.90, 95% CI -1.75 to -0.05;1 RCT; 120 children; very low-certainty evidence; Analysis 3.3).3. Pulmonary function testThis outcome was not measured.4. Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of discharge
This outcome was not measured.5. Duration of mechanical ventilationThis outcome was not measured.6. Duration of intensive care unit stayThis outcome was not measured.D I S C U S S I O NSummary of main resultsWe included four randomised controlled trials (RCT; 564 children).Each trial compared magnesium sulphate, either alone or incombination, with diferent interventions. Of seven proposedcomparisons, data were available for five. Studies comparedmagnesium sulphate with placebo or no treatment, a conventionalbronchodilator, or hypertonic saline. No treatment was standardcare, epinephrine, or salbutamol for both groups. If measured, theoutcomes were reported by a single trial only, resulting in low-quality or very low-quality evidence for all outcomes.Therefore, we are uncertain about the efects of magnesiumsulphate on mortality, adverse events, the duration of hospital stay,clinical severity at 24 or 48 hours, or the risk of readmission within30 days.None of the studies reported on two of our primary outcomes,time to recovery and mortality. However, correspondence withauthors of two trials confirmed there were no deaths in any of thegroups (Alansari 2017; Kose 2014). It may be that mortality ratesassociated with acute bronchiolitis are low, and only one studyincluded children with severe bronchiolitis, while three studiesMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsDuration of hospital stay was reported in diferent formats in eachstudy, but there was little or no diference found between groups.Efects on clinical severity at 24 or 48 hours were uncertain formagnesium sulphate alone compared to placebo or hypertonicsaline, or when combined with epinephrine and compared tonormal saline + epinephrine.
Pulmonary function tests were not measured in any of the includedtrials. Hospital re-admission rate within 30 days of dischargewas measured by one trial. Magnesium sulphate may increasehospital readmission rate within 14 days of discharge comparedwith placebo. Duration of mechanical ventilation and intensive careunit stay were not available for any comparison.We found that the available evidence was insuficient to establishthe eficacy and safety of magnesium sulphate due to single studiesanalysing small numbers of children for each comparison.Overall completeness and applicability of evidenceThe available evidence is insuficient to determine the superiorityor inferiority of magnesium sulphate over other treatments forchildren with acute bronchiolitis. Our searches identified relevantstudies, abstracts, and ongoing studies. Of the four includedstudies, only Alansari 2017 had a published protocol available,and reported all predefined outcomes. The overall applicabilityof the evidence was low, due to imprecision and risk of bias.Studies difered regarding intervention groups, and could not bepooled for analysis. No studies were available for two comparisons:magnesium sulphate versus epinephrine, and magnesium sulphate+ hypertonic saline versus no treatment or normal saline +hypertonic saline. The evidence determining the role of magnesiumsulphate on the primary outcome, time to recovery, was notavailable, as this outcome was not measured in any of the trials.There was a lack of data for the remaining primary outcomes,mortality and adverse events. Evidence from single studies onlywere available for the remainder of the outcomes.
Quality of the evidenceWe used GRADE methods to assess the overall certainty of evidence.We assessed it as very low for most outcomes for which datawere available, due to very serious imprecision (i.e. single trialanalysing few participants for each comparison). We assessedthe domains regarding allocation and blinding as unclear, whichsuggests incomplete reporting. We assessed one trial at low risk ofbias for all domains; and one trial at unclear risk of bias in mostdomains.Potential biases in the review processThe search strategy was designed to detect both RCTs andnon-RCTs, and it is unlikely that relevant studies were notidentified and assessed. We attempted to obtain additionalinformation from the trial authors as required. Two review authorsindependently screened the search results, determined studiesfor inclusion, assessed risk of bias, extracted relevant data, andconducted GRADE assessments. We resolved discrepancies with anindependent review author three times, regarding risk of bias andGRADE assessment. There were some deviations from the protocol,but these were unlikely to introduce bias. We could not assesspublication bias due to the small number of studies available. Itis possible that some studies with negative results were missed, ifthey were not available in the public domain.Agreements and disagreements with other studies orreviewsWe did not find any published reviews that addressed the sameclinical question considered in our review.A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practiceThere are insuficient data and evidence to establish the eficacyand safety of magnesium sulphate for children under two years ofage with acute bronchiolitis. We are uncertain, if compared withplacebo, magnesium sulphate may be associated with an increasedreadmission rate within 14 days of discharge from hospital (low-certainty evidence).There is no evidence available for our primary outcome, timeto recovery, for any comparison; and no evidence for secondaryoutcomes, duration of mechanical ventilation, intensive care unitstay, and pulmonary function.Implications for researchWell-designed randomised controlled trials to assess the efectsof magnesium sulphate for children with acute bronchiolitis areneeded. Future trials enrolling children from diferent settings,and including very ill children with bronchiolitis are also needed.Outcomes, such as time to recovery, adverse efects, need formechanical ventilation, duration of mechanical ventilation, needfor intensive care unit admission, and duration of intensive careunit stay must be included.A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SWe thank Khalid Ansari and Mehmat Kose for their graciousassistance in providing additional data and responding to ourquestions (Alansari 2019; Kose 2019). We thank Arun K Yadav for hissupport and help in this review. We thank Dr Kalpana Kumari andDr Rahul Teotia for their help with analyses.The Methods section of the protocol for this review was based ona standard template developed by Cochrane Airways, and adaptedby the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group.
We would also like to acknowledge the reviewers, Professor DavidIsaacs, University of Sydney, Australia and Linjie Zhang, Facultyof Medicine, Federal University of Rio Grande, Brazil for givingus valuable suggestions and comments. We acknowledge AnneLyddiatt and Dee Schneiderman, the consumer reviewers, forproviding valuable suggestions during the course of peer review.We also acknowledge the contact editor, Lubna Al-Ansary, andstatistical editor, Conor Teljeur, for giving their valuable time to thisreview.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewAlansari 2017 {published and unpublished data}
Alansari K, Sayyed R, Davidson BL, Al Jawala S, Ghadier M.Intravenous magnesium sulfate for bronchiolitis: A randomizedtrial. European Journal of Pediatrics 2016;175(11):1511. [DOI:10.1007/s00431-016-2785-8]*  Alansari K, Sayyed R, Davidson BL, Al Jawala S, Ghadier M. IVmagnesium sulfate for bronchiolitis: a randomized trial. Chest2017;152(1):113-9. [DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2017.03.002]Alansari K. Mean and standard deviations in our trial [personalcommunication]. Email to: S Chandelia 17 April 2019.Kose 2014 {published and unpublished data}*  Kose M, Ozturk MA, Poyrazoglu H, Elmas T, Ekinci D, Tubas F,et al. The eficacy of nebulized salbutamol, magnesiumsulfate, and salbutamol/magnesium sulfate combinationin moderate bronchiolitis. European Journal of Pediatrics2014;173(9):1157-60. [PMID: 24687251]Kose M. Mean and standard deviations in our trial [personalcommunication]. Email to: S Chandelia 29 April 2019.Modaresi 2015 {published data only (unpublished sought but notused)}Modaresi MR, Faghihinia J, Kelishadi R, Reisi M, Mirlohi S,Pajhang F, et al. Erratum to: nebulized magnesium sulfatein acute bronchiolitis: a randomized controlled trial. IndianJournal of Pediatrics 2016;83(5):487.
*  Modaresi MR, Faghihinia J, Kelishadi R, Reisi M, Mirlohi S,Pajhang F, et al. Nebulized magnesium sulfate in acutebronchiolitis: a randomized controlled trial. Indian Journal ofPediatrics 2015;82(9):794-8. [PMID: 25731897]Modaresi MR, Faghihinia J, Mirlohi H, Pajhang F. Theefectiveness of magnesium sulfate nebulizer in treatmentof acute bronchiolitis. Paediatric Respiratory Reviews2012;13(suppl 1):S58. [DOI: 10.1016/S1526-0542(12)70078-7]Modaresi MR, Faghihinia J, Mirlohi S, Pajhang F. Evaluating theefectiveness of magnesium sulphate nebulizer in treatmentof acute bronchiolitis. Journal of Isfahan Medical School2011;29(152):1142-7.Priya 2018 {unpublished data only}Priya SS. Nebulized magnesium sulfate versushypertonic saline in acute bronchiolitis: arandomized control trial [Masters thesis]. repository-tnmgrmu.ac.in/9235/2/200700218sathiya_priya.pdf (accessed 5March 2019). References to studies excluded from this reviewGupta 2015 {published data only}Gupta S. Additonal information in our trial [personalcommunication]. Email to: S Chandelia 1 May 2019.
*  Gupta S. Add-on use of magnesium sulfate in children withbronchiolitis. Pediatric Pulmonology 2015;50(39):S58-9.Pruikkonen 2018 {published data only}Pruikkonen H, Tapiainen T, Kallio M, Dunder T, Pokka T, Uhari M,et al. Intravenous magnesium sulfate for acute wheezing inyoung children: a randomised double-blind trial. EuropeanRespiratory Journal 2018;51(2):1701579. [PMID: 29437941]Rady 2018 {published data only (unpublished sought but not used)}*  Rady HI, Shaaban HH, Bazaraa HM, Abdelmonem SE, Aly YS.Magnesium sulphate as an adjuvant therapy in critically illinfants and children presenting with wheezy chest. Journal ofPediatrics & Neonatal Biology 2018;3(1):5.Rady HI. Additonal information in our trial [personalcommunication]. Email to: S Chandelia 25 November 2019.Saied Y, Hamdy H, Bazaraa H, Rady H, Elanwary S. Magnesiumsulphate as an adjuvant therapy in critically ill infants andchildren presenting with wheezy chest in addition to standardtreatment. European Respiratory Journal 2018;52(Suppl62):PA2321. [DOI: 10.1183/13993003.congress-2018.PA2321] References to ongoing studies
CTRI/2017/02/007919 {published data only}CTRI/2017/02/007919. Magnesium sulphate nebulizationin acute bronchiolitis: a randomized controlled trial [Efectof nebulized magnesium sulfate in acute bronchiolitis].www.ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/pmaindet2.php?trialid=17290 (firstreceived 20 February 2017).CTRI/2018/06/014400 {published data only}CTRI/2018/06/014400. Role of magnesium sulfate inbronchiolitis: a randomized control trial [Role of magnesiumsulfate in children having bronchiolitis]. www.ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/pmaindet2.php?trialid=26334 (first received 4June 2018). Additional referencesAAP Subcommittee 2006American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Diagnosisand Management of Bronchiolitis. Diagnosis and managementof bronchiolitis. Pediatrics 2006;118(4):1774-93. [DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-2223]Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, Eccles M, Falck-Ytter Y, Flottorp S,et al, GRADE Working Group. Grading quality of evidence andstrength of recommendations. BMJ 2004;328(7454):1490.Calvo C, Pozo F, Garcia-Garcia ML, Sanchez M, Lopez-Valero M,Perez-Brena P, et al. Detection of new respiratory viruses inhospitalized infants with bronchiolitis: a three-year prospectivestudy. Acta Paediatrica 2010;99(6):883-7. [PMID: 20163373]Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCarroll KN, Gebretsadik T, Grifin MR, Wu P, Dupont WD,Mitchel EF, et al. Increasing burden and risk factors forbronchiolitis-related medical visits in infants enrolled in a statehealth care insurance plan. Pediatrics 2008;122(1):58-64. [PMID:18595987]Castillo JD, Engbaek L. The nature of the neuromuscularblock produced by magnesium. Journal of Physiology1954;124(2):370-84. [PMID: 13175138]
Ciarallo L, Sauer AH, Shannon MW. Intravenous magnesiumtherapy for moderate to severe pediatric asthma: results ofa randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Pediatrics1996;129(6):809-14. [DOI: 10.1016/S0022-3476(96)70023-9]Enriquez A, Chu IW, Mellis C, Lin WY. Nebuliseddeoxyribonuclease for viral bronchiolitis in childrenyounger than 24 months. Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews 2012, Issue 11. Art. No: CD008395. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD008395.pub2]Fernandes 2013Fernandes RM, Bialy LM, Vandermeer B, Tjosvold L, Plint AC,Patel H, et al. Glucocorticoids for acute viral bronchiolitisin infants and young children. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2013, Issue 6. Art. No: CD004878. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD004878.pub4]Flores-Gonzalez 2017Flores-Gonzalez JC, Mayordomo-Colunga J, Jordan I, Miras-Veiga A, Montero-Valladares C, Olmedilla-Jodar M, et al.Prospective multicentre study on the epidemiology and currenttherapeutic management of severe bronchiolitis in Spain.BioMed Research International 2017 Mar 22 [Epub ahead ofprint];2017:2565397. [DOI: 10.1155/2017/2565397]Gadomski AM, Scribani MB. Bronchodilators for bronchiolitis.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 6. Art. No:CD001266. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001266.pub4]Goodacre S, Cohen J, Bradburn M, Gray A, Benger J, Coats T.Intravenous or nebulised magnesium sulphate versus standardtherapy for severe acute asthma (3Mg trial): a double-blind,randomised controlled trial. Lancet Respiratory Medicine2013;1(4):293-300. [PMID: 24429154]
Gourgoulianis 2004Gourgoulianis KI, Chatziparasidis G, Chatziefhimiou A,Molyvdas PA. Magnesium as a relaxing factor of airway smoothmuscles. Journal of Aerosol Medicine 2004;14(3):301-7. [DOI:10.1089/089426801316970259]GRADEpro GDT [Computer program]McMaster University (developed by Evidence Prime) GRADEproGDT. Version accessed prior to 23 November 2017. Hamilton(ON): McMaster University (developed by Evidence Prime).Available at gradepro.org.Green CA, Yeates D, Goldacre A, Sande C, Parslow RC,McShane P, et al. Admission to hospital for bronchiolitis inEngland: trends over five decades, geographical variation andassociation with perinatal characteristics and subsequentasthma. Archives of Disease in Childhood 2016;101(2):140-6.[PMID: 26342094]Grifiths B, Kew KM. Intravenous magnesium sulfate for treatingchildren with acute asthma in the emergency department.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 4. Art. No:CD011050. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011050.pub2]Hartling L, Bialy LM, Vandermeer B, Tjosvold L, Johnson DW,Plint AC, et al. Epinephrine for bronchiolitis. Cochrane Databaseof Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 6. Art. No: CD003123. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD003123.pub3]
Hasegawa K, Tsugawa Y, Brown DF, Mansbach JM, CamargoCA Jr. Trends in bronchiolitis hospitalizations in the UnitedStates, 2000-2009. Pediatrics 2013;132(1):28-36. [DOI: 10.1542/peds.2012-3877]Hasegawa K, Tsugawa Y, Brown DF, Mansbach JM, CamargoCA Jr. Temporal trends in emergency department visits forbronchiolitis in the United States, 2006 to 2010. PediatricInfectious Disease Journal 2014;33(1):11-8. [PMID: 23934206]Hasegawa K, Mansbach JM, Teach SJ, Fisher ES, Hershey D,Koh JY, et al. Multicenter study of viral etiology and relapse inhospitalized children with bronchiolitis. Pediatric InfectiousDisease Journal 2014;33(8):809-13. [PMID: 24577039]Higgins JP, Green S, editor(s). Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions version 5.1.0 (updatedMarch 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available fromhandbook.cochrane.org.Hirota K, Sato T, Hashimoto Y, Yoshioka H, Ohtomo N,Ishihara H, et al. Relaxant efect of magnesium and zinc onhistamine-induced bronchoconstriction in dogs. Critical CareMedicine 1999;27(6):1159-63. [PMID: 10397222]Kew KM, Kirtchuk L, Michell CI. Intravenous magnesiumsulfate for treating adults with acute asthma inthe emergency department. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2014, Issue 5. Art. No: CD010909. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD010909.pub2]Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsKumasaka D, Lindeman KS, Clancy J, Lande B, Croxton TL,Hirshman CA. MgSO4 relaxes porcine airway smooth muscleby reducing Ca2+ entry. American Journal of Physiology1996;270(3):L469-74. [PMID: 8638740]Lakhanpaul 2002Lakhanpaul M, Armon K, Bordley C, MacFaul R, Smith S, Vyas H,et al. An evidence based guideline for children presentingwith acute breathing dificulty. www.nottingham.ac.uk/paediatric-guideline/breathingguideline.pdf (accessed prior to23 November 2017).Lanari M, Prinelli F, Adorni F, Santo SD, Vandini S, Silvestri M,et al, Study Group of Italian Society of Neonatology on RiskFactors for RSV Hospitalization. Risk factors for bronchiolitishospitalization during the first year of life in a multicenterItalian birth cohort. Italian Journal of Pediatrics 2015;41:40.[DOI: 10.1186/s13052-015-0149-z]Liet JM, Ducruet T, Gupta V, Cambonie G. Heliox inhalationtherapy for bronchiolitis in infants. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2015, Issue 9. Art. No: CD006915. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD006915.pub3]
Lowell DI, Lister G, Von Koss H, McCarthy P. Wheezing in infants:the response to epinephrine. Pediatrics 1987;79:939-45. [PMID:3295741]Lu JF, Nightingale CH. Magnesium sulfate in eclampsiaand pre-eclampsia: pharmacokinetic principles. ClinicalPharmacokinetics 2000;38(4):305-14. [PMID: 10803454]Mahajan P, Haritos D, Rosenberg N, Thomas R. Comparisonof nebulized magnesium sulfate plus albuterol to nebulizedalbuterol plus saline in children with acute exacerbationsof mild to moderate asthma. Journal of Emergency Medicine2004;27(1):21-5. [PMID: 15219299]Mansbach JM, Piedra PA, Stevenson MD, Sullivan AF, Forgey TF,Clark S, et al. Prospective multicenter study of children withbronchiolitis requiring mechanical ventilation. Pediatrics2012;130(3):e492-500.Mansbach JM, Piedra PA, Teach SJ, Sullivan AF, Forgey T,Clark S, et al. Prospective multicenter study of viraletiology and hospital length of stay in children with severebronchiolitis. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine2012;166(8):700-6. [DOI: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2011.1669]Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaf J, Altman DG, PRISMA Group.Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ 2009;339:b2535.Munoz-Quiles 2016Munoz-Quiles C, Lopez-Lacort M, Ubeda-Sansano I, Aleman-Sanchez S, Perez-Vilar S, Puig-Barbera J, et al. Population-based analysis of bronchiolitis epidemiology in Valencia, Spain.Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 2016;35(3):275-80. [PMID:26658376]
Murray J, Bottle A, Sharland M, Modi N, Aylin P, Majeed A, etal. Risk factors for hospital admission with RSV bronchiolitisin England: a population-based birth cohort study. PLoS One2014;9(2):e89186. [DOI: 10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0089186]Review Manager 2014 [Computer program]Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration ReviewManager 5 (RevMan 5). Version 5.3. Copenhagen: NordicCochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014.Rivera-Sepulveda 2017Rivera-Sepulveda A, Garcia-Rivera EJ. Epidemiology ofbronchiolitis: a description of emergency department visits andhospitalizations in Puerto Rico, 2010-2014. Tropical Medicineand Health 2017;45:24. [DOI: 10.1186/s41182-017-0064-7]Scarfone RJ, Loiselle JM, Jofe MD, Mull CC, Stiller S,Thompson K, et al. A randomized trial of magnesium in theemergency department treatment of children with asthma.Annals of Emergency Medicine 2000;36(6):572-8. [DOI: 10.1067/mem.2000.111060]Schwalfenberg 2017Schwalfenberg GK, Genuis SJ. The importance of magnesium inclinical healthcare. Scientifica (Cairo) 2017 Sep 28 [Epub aheadof print]:4179326. [DOI: 10.1155/2017/4179326]
Shay DK, Holman RC, Roosevelt GE, Clarke MJ, Anderson LJ.Bronchiolitis-associated mortality and estimates of respiratorysyncytial virus-associated deaths among US children,1979-1997. Journal of Infectious Diseases 2001;183(1):16-22.[DOI: 10.1086/317655]Spivey WH, Skobelof EM, Levin RM. Efect of magnesiumchloride on rabbit bronchial smooth muscle. Annals ofEmergency Medicine 1990;19(10):1107-12. [PMID: 1977337]Swaminathan 2003Swaminathan R. Magnesium metabolism and its disorders.Clinical Biochemist. Reviews 2003;24(2):47-66. [PMID: 18568054]Wang EE, Milner RA, Navas L, Maj H. Observer agreement forrespiratory signs and oximetry in infants hospitalized with lowerrespiratory infections. American Review of Respiratory Disease1992;145:106-9. [DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/145.1.106]Zhang L, Mendoza-Sassi RA, Wainwright C, Klassen TP.Nebulised hypertonic saline solution for acute bronchiolitis inMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsinfants. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue12. Art. No: CD006458. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006458.pub4] References to other published versions of this reviewChandelia 2018Chandelia S, Yadav AK, Kumar D, Chadha N. Magnesiumsulphate for acute bronchiolitis in children under two years ofage. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2018, Issue 2. Art.No: CD012965. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012965]
 * Indicates the major publication for the study C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E SCharacteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID] Study characteristicsMethodsTrial registration: NCT02145520Dates of study: October 2012 to May 2015Duration of study: until child dischargedInclusion criteria: children aged <= 18 months, with moderate to severe viral bronchiolitis, with prodro-mal history consistent with viral upper respiratory tract infection, followed by wheezing or crackles onauscultation, or both, and a Wang bronchiolitis severity score >= 4 on presentationExclusion criteria: children were excluded if they had 1 or more of the following characteristics:preterm birth <= 34 weeks' gestation, previous history of wheezing, steroid use within 48 hours of pre-sentation, obtundation and progressive respiratory failure requiring intensive care unit admission, his-tory of apnoea within 24 hours before presentation, oxygen saturation <= 85% on room air, history of adiagnosis of chronic lung disease, congenital heart disease, immunodeficiency, exposure to varicellawithin 21 days before enrolment, known magnesium or calcium metabolism disturbance, or known ad-verse reaction to magnesium sulphateParticipantsRandomised: 162 infants; 80 in the magnesium group and 82 in the placebo group.Analysed: 160 infants; 78 in the magnesium group and 82 in the placebo group; 2 enrolled infantscould not be included in the analysis: 1 was immunodeficient and 1 was discharged against medical ad-viceAnalysis for follow-up: at 2 weeks: 158 infants; magnesium 77; placebo 81 (2 children were lost to fol-low-up, 1 from each group)Age: (mean (SD)) was 4 (3) months in the magnesium group and 5 (4) months in the placebo groupGender distribution: (male: female) was 58:22 in the magnesium group and 48:34 in the placebo groupBaseline Wang bronchiolitis severity score: mean (SD) was 6.85 (1.30) in the magnesium group and6.97 (1.17) in the placebo group
Comparator: placebo; 0.9% salineConcomitant treatment in both study arms: 5 mL nebulised 5% hypertonic saline in 1 mL 1:1000 epi-nephrine given at 4 hour intervals throughout the infirmary stayMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOutcomesPlanned outcomes: the study protocol was available, so we could determine the planned outcomes.
1. Improvement of bronchiolitis clinical severity score using Wang score at 4, 8, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, and72 hours2. Need for admission to intensive care unit during the initial visit3. Other outcomes within 2 weeks after discharge were:*need for clinical revisit;*need for infirmary or observation unit admission; and*need for intensive care unit admission.Reported outcomes: all outcomes planned in study protocol were reported in the paper.Outcome data not provided in a usable way for improvement percentage of discharge after a dose ofintravenous magnesium sulphate. Study authors used geometric mean (95% CI) time until dischargeand expressed results as ratio of geometric mean time in 2 interventions. Mean (SD) was not providedby the authors.NotesFunding source: this study was hospital sponsored by Hamad Medical CorporationComment: the study did not provide mean and standard deviations for clinical severity score at vari-ous time points. They included a bar chart from which it was difficult to obtain the exact scores. The tri-al author provided this information in the form of a table."Randomisation was stratified into two groups, patients with a history ofeczema and/or known to have a parent or full sibling with prior physician diag-nosis of asthma, and patients without. Block randomisation was used for allo-cation".Unclear riskDetails of blinding were not mentionedLow riskOnly 1 child was lost to follow-up in either group, and excluded from analysisLow riskOutcomes planned in the protocol were reported in the published report  Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudy characteristics
Study design: double-blind, prospective clinical trialSetting and centres: single-centre, short-stay unit, Pediatric Emergency Department of Erciyes Univer-sity Hospital, Central Anatolia, Kayseri, TurkeyDates of study: October 2012 to March 2013Inclusion criteria: children aged 1 to 24 months, history of preceding viral upper respiratory infectionfollowed by wheezing and crackles on auscultation, first wheezing episode, and clinical severity score 4to 8 on admission. Viral respiratory infection was diagnosed on clinical grounds.Exclusion criteria: infants with clinical severity score < 4 or > 8, oxygen saturation (SaO2) < 86 % inroom air, chronic cardiopulmonary or neurological disease, premature birth, birthweight < 2500 g, his-tory of recurrent wheezing episodes, history of atopy, proven immune deficiency, age < 1 month or > 2years, proven or suspected acute bacterial infection, previous treatment with bronchodilators or corti-costeroids, the presence of symptoms > 7 days, proven asthma in parents and siblings, and consolida-tion or atelectasis on a chest roentgenogramParticipantsRandomised: 57 infantsAnalysed: 56 infants; magnesium 19; salbutamol 18; salbutamol plus magnesium sulphate 19 (1 childin the magnesium sulphate group subsequently withdrew because of deteriorated clinical statusAge: median age (min to max) was 7.5 (3 to 19) months in the salbutamol group; 8 (4 to 22) months inthe magnesium sulphate group; and 8 (3 to 21) months in the salbutamol + magnesium sulphate group
Gender distribution (male:female) was 12:6 in the salbutamol group; 12:7 in the magnesium sulphategroup; and 13:6 in the magnesium sulphate + salbutamol groupBaseline clinical severity score: mean (95% CI) clinical severity score was 5.9 (5.4 to 6.4) in the salbu-tamol group; 6.1 (5.6 to 6.5) in the magnesium sulphate group; and 6.3 (5.7 to 6.8) in the salbutamol +magnesium sulphate groupBaseline heart rate: mean heart rate was 149.4 (95% CI 136.9 to 161.8) in the salbutamol group; 147.8(95% CI 139.4 to 156.1) in the magnesium sulphate group; and 156.7 (95% CI 149.2 to 165.2) in thesalbutamol + magnesium sulphate groupInterventionsIntervention: inhaled magnesium sulphate 150 mg, diluted to 4 mL with 0.9 % saline solution1. Salbutamol: salbutamol group received inhalation of salbutamol (Ventolin, GlaxoSmithKline, Middle-sex, UK), 0.15 mg/kg, diluted to 4 mL with 0.9% saline solution2. Salbutamol + magnesium sulphate: received inhalation of salbutamol 0.15 mg/kg + inhaled magne-sium sulphate 150 mg, diluted to 4 mL with 0.9% saline solutionAll groups received medications twice, at 30-minute intervalsReported outcomes: main outcomes were:1. clinical severity score, (at 0, 60, 240 minutes of the study);2. heart rate, (at 0, 60, 240 minutes of the study);3. duration of hospitalisation (hours); and
Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews4. complication rates. Hypotension, arrhythmias, and loss of deep tendon reflexes were studied beforeand after each dose was administered.Outcome data not provided in a usable way for duration of hospital stay. Authors used mean (95% CI)time and expressed result as P value for significance comparing two interventions. Mean (SD) was notprovided by the trial authorsNotesFunding source: not mentionedConflicts of interest: noneRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear risk"All eligible patients were randomly assigned to one of the three groups".Details of randomisation method, or how randomisation was done were notavailableBlinding (performancebias and detection bias)All outcomesUnclear riskThe trial report mentioned double-blinded study, but did not report for whom,or how double-blinding was conductedIncomplete outcome data(attrition bias)All outcomes
Low risk1 child in the magnesium sulphate group subsequently withdrew because ofdeteriorating clinical status. This was unlikely to affect resultsSelective reporting (re-porting bias)Other biasUnclear riskSource of funding not mentionedKose 2014  (Continued)  Study characteristicsMethodsTrial registration: not traceableStudy design: double-blind randomised clinical trialSetting and centres: 3 hospitals paediatric departments, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfa-han, IranDates of study: January 2010 to December 2011Duration of study: until child was dischargedInclusion criteria: acute onset of respiratory distress, positive wheezing on physical examination,chest radiograph compatible with bronchiolitis, aged < 12 months, and RDAI score of at least 5Exclusion criteria: family history of asthma; chronic pulmonary, cardiac, neurologic and oncologic dis-ease; previous use of glucocorticoids, bronchodilators or monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI); tachy-cardia exceeding 200 beats per minute; tachypnoea exceeding 100 breaths per minuteParticipantsRandomised: 125 infants. 2 study arms: magnesium sulphate + epinephrine 63; epinephrine 62Analysed: magnesium sulphate + epinephrine 60; epinephrine 62. Three children in the magnesiumsulphate + epinephrine group, and two children in the epinephrine group were subsequently with-drawn because of deteriorating clinical statusMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis for follow-up: there was no follow-up of participantsAge: mean (SD) age was 5.2 (2.1) months in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group; 4.8 (3.2)months in the epinephrine groupGender distribution: (male:female) was 34:26 in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group; 38:22in the epinephrine groupBaseline clinical severity score: mean (SD) 11.4 (2.7) in the magnesium sulphate plus epinephrinegroup; 11 (2.7) in the epinephrine groupBaseline heart rate: mean (SD) 104 (5) in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group; 104 (4) in theepinephrine groupBaseline O2 saturation: mean (SD) 88 (1) in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group; 87 (1) in theepinephrine groupInterventionsIntervention: 40 mg/kg magnesium sulphate (3.25%) and 0.1 mL/kg epinephrine (1/1000) mixed withnormal saline nebulisationConcomitant treatment in both groups: 0.1 mL/kg epinephrine (1/1000) mixed with normal salinenebulisationAll groups received 3 doses of each medication at 20-minute intervals, and then every 4 hoursOutcomesPlanned outcomes: no protocol availableReported outcomes: primary outcome was length of hospital stay (defined as the time from the firststudy inhalation until discharge from the hospital, as recorded in the medical record for each child).Other outcomes were1. RDAI scores;2. oxygen saturation;3. heart rate;4. respiratory rate; and5. use of ventilatory support.
All outcomes recorded at admission, first 20 minutes, second 20 minutes, third 20 minutes, after 4hours, and then daily during hospitalisationNotesFunding source: supported financially by Child Growth and Development Research Center, IsfahanUniversity of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, IranConflicts of interest: noneRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementAllocation concealment(selection bias)Blinding (performancebias and detection bias)All outcomesLow riskKnowledge of allocations was never broken throughout the study, as stated bythe trial authorsIncomplete outcome data(attrition bias)All outcomesLow risk3 children in the magnesium sulphate + epinephrine group and 2 children inthe epinephrine group were subsequently withdrawn because of deterioratingclinical statusMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsSelective reporting (re-porting bias)
Low riskThe planned outcomes in the methods section were reported in the resultssectionOther biasLow riskNone of the trial authors disclosed receipt of any grants, or funds, or sharesfrom any pharmaceutical company. Authors reported no conflicts of interestModaresi 2015  (Continued)  Study characteristicsMethodsTrial registration: not traceableStudy design: single-blind randomised controlled trialSetting and centres: single-centre, emergency department, paediatric intensive care unit and wardsof Institute of Social Paediatrics, Stanley Medical College and Hospital, Tamilnadu, India.Dates of study: January 2017 to September 2017Duration of study: until child was dischargedInclusion criteria: children less than 12 months old, with acute onset of respiratory symptoms associ-ated with fever, cough, tachypnoea, or chest radiograph findings consistent with bronchiolitis (such ashyperinflation), and first episode of wheezingExclusion criteria: previous history of wheezing1. History of chronic pulmonary, cardiac, neurologic, and immunological disorders2. Previous use of steroids and bronchodilators3. History of prematurity (< 34 weeks' gestation)4. Radiographic evidence of pneumonia5. Severe bronchiolitisParticipantsRandomised: 220 infants. 2 study arms: nebulised magnesium sulphate 110; nebulised hypertonicsaline 110Analysed: magnesium sulphate 110; hypertonic saline 110. No missing data.Analysis for follow-up: none
Age: the mean (SD) age was 7.1 (3.1) months in the magnesium sulphate group; 6.9 (3) months in thehypertonic saline group.Gender distribution: (male:female) 63:47 in the magnesium sulphate group; 63:47 in the hypertonicsaline group.Baseline clinical severity score (RDAI): mean (SD) 8.0 (1.8) in the magnesium sulphate group; 7.9 (1.7)in the hypertonic saline groupInterventionsIntervention: magnesium sulphate; 0.1 to 0.2 mL/kg/dose of 25% magnesium sulphate, mixed to 4 mLwith 0.9% normal saline nebulisationComparator: 4 mL hypertonic saline nebulisationAll children received medications at 20-minute intervals for the first 3 doses, and then every 4 hoursConcomitant treatment in both groups: none mentionedOutcomesPlanned outcomes: no protocol availableMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsReported outcomes:1. length of hospital stay; and2. RDAI score, recorded at 0, 20, 40 minutes, 1 hour, then every 12 hours until dischargeNotesFunding source: not mentioned
Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskDeatails of randomisation not available. Sealed envelopes used, but it is notknown whether these were sequentially numbered and opaqueBlinding (performancebias and detection bias)All outcomesUnclear riskAuthors reported the study to be single-blinded, but due to unclear alloca-tions, blinding method was not robustIncomplete outcome data(attrition bias)All outcomesLow riskThere were no dropoutsSelective reporting (re-porting bias)Low riskThe planned outcomes in the methods section were reported in the resultssectionOther biasUnclear riskDetails related to source of funding and the conflicts of interests were notshared.Priya 2018  (Continued)CI: confidence intervalSD: standard deviationRDAI: respiratory distress assessment instrumentmin: minimummax: maximum Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID] StudyReason for exclusionGupta 2015The study was published as a conference abstract. It included children presenting with first or sec-ond episodes of moderate to severe acute bronchiolitis. Trial authors responded, but could notprovide additional data related to first episodes of bronchiolitis (inclusion criteria for this review).
Pruikkonen 2018Study population did not match the review inclusion criteria. Trial authors included children withmore than one episode of wheezing, while inclusion eligibility was limited to children with firstepisode of wheezing in this review, as per the definition by AAP Subcommittee 2006.Rady 2018This study included children with a wheezy chest from all causes, which is not part of our inclusioncriteria. The trial authors stated that they included infants and children between 2 months and 12years. However, the trial authors could not provide details of outcomes on children up to 2 years ofage, which was part of our inclusion criteria for this review. Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
MethodsTrial registration: CTRI/2017/02/007919Setting and centres: single centre, emergency department, Department of Paediatrics, GMSH,Chandigarh, IndiaDates of study: first enrolment 12 January 2017Duration of study: intervention duration: 3 hour; outcome assessment duration: until child wasdischargedInclusion criteria: children aged 2 to 12 months with diagnosis of acute bronchiolitis, with shorthistory of cough, with or without fever of less than 7 days duration, wheezing on examination, firstattack of wheezing.Exclusion criteria: past history of wheezing, family history of bronchial asthma, presence of con-genital heart disease or congenital malformation, history of prematurity or mechanical ventilationin newborn period, pneumonia or pleural effusion, SAM, very sick child with shock, seizures, tachy-cardia (HR > 200/minute), and respiratory failure, foreign body ingestion, history of nebulisation ofany drugParticipantsPlan to randomise 104 infantsInterventionsIntervention: magnesium sulphate nebulisation: enrolled cases in the intervention group shall begiven 40 mg/kg magnesium sulphate nebulisation, diluted with 2 mL to 3 mL normal saline. 3 dosesof medication will be given at 1-hour intervals, and will not be repeated after 3 doses
Comparator: oxygen therapy, IV fluids or oral feeds: this group will be treated with oxygen therapy,IV fluids, or oral feeds, symptomatic treatment for fever, and supportive careOutcomesPrimary outcomes: improvement in severity of bronchiolitis, measured with the Respiratory Dis-tress Assessment Instrument (RDAI) score. Timepoint: RDAI score shall be assessed at admission, at3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96 hours, and at discharge.Contact informationName: Dr Neeraj DhawanEmail: Address: Department of Paediatrics, Government Multispeciality Hospital, Chandigarh, India  Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMethodsTrial registration: CTRI/2018/06/014400Study design: randomised, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trialSetting and centres: single centre in IndiaDates of study: first enrolment 2 July 2018Duration of study: interventions: 24 hours; follow-up: 2 weeks
Inclusion criteria: infants aged 1 month to 24 months presenting to paediatric emergency or OPD,with diagnosis of bronchiolitis and BSS >= 4, and guardian of child willing to give informed consentExclusion criteria:1. Previous history of wheezing2. Those requiring mechanical ventilation3. Children with haemodynamically significant heart disease, chromosomal anomalies, immunod-eficiency, cystic fibrosis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or epileptic encephalopathyParticipantsRandomised: plan to randomise 50 InfantsAnalysed: not availableAnalysis for follow-up at 2 weeks: not availableAge: infants 1 month to 24 months of ageGender distribution: not availableBaseline Wang bronchiolitis severity score: > 4InterventionsIntervention: nebulisation with 3 mL 3.2% magnesium sulphate every 4 hours for 24 hours, in ad-dition to standard care. Oxygen saturation will be noted before starting treatment, and oxygen willbe supplemented if < 92%. If the saturation falls below 90% in either group, and persists despiteoxygen supplementation, the child will be considered for ventilation.Comparator: standard care: maintenance of adequate hydration and oxygenationConcomitant treatment in both study arms: none writtenOutcomesPrimary outcomes: to compare improvement of bronchiolitis severity scores between treatmentgroups.Secondary outcomes:1. Need for admission to intensive care unit during the initial visit in both groups2. Within 2 weeks after discharge:*Need for clinic revisit*Need for hospital admission*Need for ICU admissionStarting date12 January 2017
Contact informationName: Dr Daisy KheraEmail Department of Pediatrics AIIMS Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, IndiaNotes Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOPD: out patient departmentBSS: bronchiolitis severity scoreSAM: severe acute malnutritionSpO2: Oxygen saturation  D A T A   A N D   A N A L Y S E S Comparison 1.   Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acute bronchiolitis in children1.1 Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hoursafter treatment1 Mean Difference (IV, Fixed,95% CI)Totals not select-ed1.3 Hospital readmission rate within 30days of discharge1 Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed,95% CI)Totals not select-edMeanSDTotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CI  Analysis 1.2.   Comparison 1: Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acutebronchiolitis in children, Outcome 2: Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphateMeanSDTotalplaceboMeanSDTotal
Mean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours magnesium sulphateFavours placebo  Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.3.   Comparison 1: Magnesium sulphate compared with placebo for acutebronchiolitis in children, Outcome 3: Hospital readmission rate within 30 days of dischargeStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphateEventsTotalplaceboEventsTotalRisk RatioM-H, Fixed, 95% CIFavours magnesium sulphateFavours placeboOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect sizeTotals not select-ed1 Mean Difference (IV, Fixed,95% CI)Totals not select-ed  Analysis 2.1.   Comparison 2: Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonicsaline for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 1: Duration of hospital stayStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphateMeanSDTotalMeanSD
TotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CI  Analysis 2.2.   Comparison 2: Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic saline for acutebronchiolitis in children, Outcome 2: Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphateMeanSDTotalhypertonic salineMeanSDTotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours magnesium sulphateFavours hypertonic saline  Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsComparison 3.   Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline + epinephrine foracute bronchiolitis in childrenOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect sizeTotals not select-ed3.2 Clinical severity score at 0 to 24hour after treatment1 Mean Difference (IV, Fixed,95% CI)Totals not select-ed3.3 Clinical severity score at 25 to 48hour after treatment1 Mean Difference (IV, Fixed,95% CI)Totals not select-ed
Study or SubgroupSDTotalMeanSDTotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CI  Analysis 3.2.   Comparison 3: Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline +epinephrine for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 2: Clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hour afer treatmentStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphate + epinephrineMeanSDTotalepinephrineMeanSDTotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours magnesium sulphate + epinephrineFavours epinephrine  Analysis 3.3.   Comparison 3: Magnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or normal saline +epinephrine for acute bronchiolitis in children, Outcome 3: Clinical severity score at 25 to 48 hour afer treatmentStudy or Subgroupmagnesium sulphate + epinephrineMeanSDTotalepinephrineMeanSDTotalMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours magnesium sulphate + epinephrineFavours epinephrine
 Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOutcomeComparisonReason for not conductinganalysisTime to recoveryAll comparisonsNo data availableNo deaths reportedMortalityMagnesium sulphate compared with placeboMagnesium sulphate + bronchodilator compared with no treatment ornormal saline + the same bronchodilatorNo adverse effects reportedMagnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic salineAdverse effects of mag-nesium sulphate treat-mentMagnesium sulphate + epinephrine compared with no treatment or nor-mal saline + epinephrineNo data availableMagnesium sulphate compared with conventional bronchodilatorDuration of hospitalstayMagnesium sulphate + bronchodilator compared with no treatment ornormal saline + the same bronchodilatorReporting format was dif-ferent. Study authors used95% confidence interval.We did not transform datafor analysis, as only singlestudy was available for thiscomparison.Magnesium sulphate compared with hypertonic salineMagnesium sulphate compared with conventional bronchodilatorClinical severity score at0 to 24 hours after treat-mentMagnesium sulphate + bronchodilator compared with no treatment ornormal saline + the same bronchodilatorNo data availableNo data availableMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Pulmonary function testAll comparisonsNo data availableHospital readmissionrate within 30 days ofdischargeAll comparisons except magnesium sulphate compared with placeboNo data availableDuration of mechanicalventilationDuration of intensivecare unit stayAll comparisonsNo data availableNote: these analyses were planned in the protocol, but were not carried out due to limited or no available data.aGeometric mean is equal to the exponential of the mean of the log-transformed values. The value of geometric mean is usually lesser thanthe arithmetic mean. Geometric mean is used as it is not much afected by the skewed distribution of data.  A P P E N D I C E SAppendix 1. MEDLINE PubMed search#1 Bronchiolitis[Mesh]#2 bronchiolitis[tiab]#3 bronchioli tides[tiab]#4 bronchiole*[tiab]#5 bronchial[tiab]#6 bronchiolar[tiab]#7 bronchodilat*[tiab]#8 bronchoconstrict*[tiab]#9 Respiratory Syncytial Viruses[MeSH:NoExp]#10 Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Human[MeSH]#11 Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections[MeSH]#12 Respiratory Syncytial Virus[tiab]#13 Respiratory Syncytial Viruses[tiab]#14 rsv[tiab]#15 #1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12OR #13 OR #14#16 "Magnesium Sulfate"[Mesh]#17 "Magnesium Compounds"[Mesh:NoExp]#18 "Magnesium"[Mesh]#19 MgSO4*[tiab]#20 Mg S04*[tiab]#21 magnesium[tiab]#22 magnesium[nm]#23 #16 OR #17 OR #18 OR #19 OR #20 OR #21 OR #22#24 #15 AND #23#25 animals [mh] NOT humans [mh]#26 #24 NOT #25Appendix 2. Embase Elsevier search#1 'bronchiolitis'/exp#2 bronchiolitis:ti,ab#3 bronchiolitides:ti,ab#4 bronchiole*:ti,ab#5 bronchial:ti,ab#6 bronchiolar:ti,ab#7 bronchodilat*:ti,ab#8 bronchoconstrict*:ti,abMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews#9 'pneumovirus'/de#10 'human respiratory syncytial virus'/exp#11 'respiratory syncytial virus infection'/exp#12 "respiratory syncytial virus":ti,ab#13 "respiratory syncytial viruses":ti,ab#14 rsv:ti,ab#15 #1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13 OR #14#16 'magnesium sulfate'/de#17 'magnesium derivative'/de#18 'magnesium'/de#19 MgSO4*:ti,ab#20 "Mg S04*":ti,ab#21 magnesium:ti,ab#22 magnesium:tn))#23 #16 OR #17 OR #18 OR #19 OR #20 OR #21 OR #22#24 #15 AND #23#25 'animal '/exp NOT 'human '/exp#26 #24 NOT #25
Appendix 3. CENTRAL search (via Wiley)#1 MeSH descriptor: [Bronchiolitis] explode all trees#2 "bronchiolitis":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#3 "bronchiolitides":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#4 bronchiole*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#5 bronchial:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#6 "bronchiolar":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#7 bronchodilat*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#8 bronchoconstrict*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#9 MeSH descriptor: [Respiratory Syncytial Viruses] this term only#10 MeSH descriptor: [Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Human] explode all trees#11 MeSH descriptor: [Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections] explode all trees#12 "respiratory syncytial virus":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#13 "respiratory syncytial viruses":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#14 "RSV":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#15 #1 or #2 or #3 or #4 or #5 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 or #12 or #13 or #14#16 MeSH descriptor: [Magnesium Sulfate] explode all trees#17 MeSH descriptor: [Magnesium Compounds] this term only#18 MeSH descriptor: [Magnesium] explode all trees#19 MgSO4*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#20 Mg S04*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#21 "magnesium":ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched)#22 #16 or #17 or #18 or #19 or #20 or #21#23 #15 and #22#24 MeSH descriptor: [Animals] explode all trees#25 MeSH descriptor: [Humans] explode all trees#26 #24 not #25#27 #23 not #26
Appendix 4. LILACS Virtual health library searchmh:C08.127.446.135$ OR Bronquiolitis OR Bronquiolite OR bronchiolitis OR bronchiolitides OR bronchiole* OR bronchial OR bronchiolarOR bronchodilat* OR bronchoconstrict* OR mh:"Respiratory Syncytial Viruses" OR mh:"Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Human" ORmh:"Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections" OR (Virus AND Sincitial AND Respiratorio) OR (Virus AND Respiratorio AND Sincicial) ORrespiratory syncytial virus OR respiratory syncytial viruses OR rsv) AND (mh:"Magnesium Sulfate" OR mh:"Magnesium Compounds" ORmh:"Magnesium" OR Magnesio OR Magnesio OR mgso4* OR "mg s04*" OR magnesiumAppendix 5. CINAHL EBSCO searchS25 (MH "Human")Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsS24 (MH "Animals+")S21 TI Magnesium OR AB MagnesiumS20 TI Mg S04* OR AB Mg S04*S19 TI MgSO4* OR AB MgSO4*S18 (MH "Magnesium")S17 (MH "Magnesium Compounds+")S16 (MH "Magnesium Sulfate")S15 S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8 OR S9 OR S10 OR S11 OR S13 OR S14S14 TI rsv OR AB rsvS13 (MH "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections")S12 TI "Respiratory syncytial virus" OR AB "Respiratory syncytial virus"S11 TI "Respiratory Syncytial Viruses" OR AB "Respiratory Syncytial Viruses"S10 (MH "Respiratory Syncytial Viruses")S9 TI pneumovirus OR AB pneumovirusS8 TI bronchoconstrict* OR AB bronchoconstrict*S7 TI bronchodilat* OR AB bronchodilat*S6 TI bronchiolar OR AB bronchiolarS5 TI bronchial OR AB bronchialS4 TI bronchiole* OR AB bronchiole*S3 TI bronchiolitides OR AB bronchiolitidesS2 TI Bronchiolitis OR AB BronchiolitisS1 (MH "Bronchiolitis+")H I S T O R Y
Protocol first published: Issue 2, 2018Review first published: Issue 12, 2020C O N T R I B U T I O N S   O F   A U T H O R SDr Sudha Chandelia (SC): conceptualised, designed the search strategy, performed the literature search, screened search results, screenedand retrieved papers against eligibility criteria, collected and extracted data, obtained and screened data on unpublished studies, entereddata into RevMan 5, conducted data analysis and interpretation, assessed certainty of evidence, co-ordinated the review, wrote and drafedthe review.Dr Dinesh Kumar (DK): provided intellectual input for the background, screened search results, retrieved and screened papers againsteligibility criteria, conducted data extraction, and assessed certainty of evidence.Ms Neelima Chadha (NC): provided intellectual input into the development of the search strategy, literature search; and provided full-textarticles.Nishant Jaiswal (NJ): provided intellectual input for 'Risk of bias' assessment, reported and wrote revised drafs of the review, providedintellectual input and guidance for GRADE application.Magnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAll authors reviewed and approved the review.D E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S TSC: None knownDK: None knownNC: None knownNJ: None knownS O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources
*PGIMER and Dr RML Hospital, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh, IndiaExternal sources*No sources of support suppliedD I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E W1. In the protocol, we planned to include non-randomised controlled trials (non-RCTs), as we were expecting to identify few studies. In thereview, we only included RCTs, as we did not identify any non-RCTs.2. We added the primary outcome, time to recovery, as it is a person-centred, and clinically important outcome, likely to be modified bythe treatment.3. In the protocol, the primary outcome, clinical severity score, had four components: clinical severity score measured using any validatedscoring system, duration of mechanical ventilation, duration of hospital stay, or duration of intensive care unit stay. These could not bedescribed under one outcome. Therefore, we separated these into four outcomes. We moved 'clinical severity score' to the secondaryoutcomes.4. We did not specify time points of clinical severity score in the protocol. Clinical severity scoring was conducted at multiple time pointsamongst the studies. Therefore, we specified the time points of clinical severity score at 0 to 24 hours, and 25 to 48 hours afer treatmentfor the review.5. There was a change in authorship: Arun K Yadav, an author on the protocol, did not co-author the review.6. We planned to meta-analyse using the random-efects model, as we anticipated the studies would difer. We used the fixed-efect modelto calculate efect size and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) when we could not pool results, and included only one study for comparison.7. We planned to conduct sensitivity and subgroup analyses. However, there were insuficient data.I N D E X   T E R M S
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)Acute Disease;  Albuterol  [therapeutic use];  Bias;  Bronchiolitis  [*drug therapy];  Bronchodilator Agents  [administration & dosage] [*therapeutic use];  Drug Therapy, Combination  [methods];  Epinephrine  [therapeutic use];  Length of Stay;  Magnesium Sulfate [administration & dosage]  [*therapeutic use];  Patient Readmission  [statistics & numerical data];  Placebos  [therapeutic use]; Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic;  Saline Solution  [therapeutic use];  Severity of Illness IndexMeSH check wordsHumans; Infant; Infant, NewbornMagnesium sulphate for treating acute bronchiolitis in children up to two years of age (Review)Copyright (c) 2020 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
