Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found Download by: [Cornell University Library]Date: 28 October 2016, At: 04:27Journal of Cosmetic and Laser TherapyISSN: 1476-4172 (Print) 1476-4180 (Online) Journal homepage: Comparison of Microwave Ablation, BotulinumToxin Injection and Liposuction-Curettage in theTreatment of Axillary Hyperhidrosis: A SystematicReviewMarwan W. Nasr, Samer F. Jabbour, Roger N. Haber, Elio G. Kechichian &Lena El HachemTo cite this article: Marwan W. Nasr, Samer F. Jabbour, Roger N. Haber, Elio G. Kechichian &Lena El Hachem (2016): Comparison of Microwave Ablation, Botulinum Toxin Injection andLiposuction-Curettage in the Treatment of Axillary Hyperhidrosis: A Systematic Review, Journalof Cosmetic and Laser Therapy, DOI: 10.1080/14764172.2016.1248438Accepted author version posted online: 26Oct 2016.
Submit your article to this journal Article views: 3View related articles View Crossmark data(c) 2016 Taylor and Francis. This provisional PDF corresponds to the article as it appeared upon acceptance. Fully formatted PDF and full text (HTML) versions will be made available soon.DISCLAIMER: The ideas and opinions expressed in the journal's Just Accepted articles do not necessarily reflect those of Taylor and Francis (the Publisher), the Editors or the journal. The Publisher does not assume any responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to any use of the material contained in these articles. The reader is advised to check the appropriate medical literature and the product information currently provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the dosages, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the treating physician or other health care professional, relying on his or her independent experience and knowledge of the patient, to determine drug dosages and the best treatment for the patient. Just Accepted articles have undergone full scientific review but none of the additional editorial preparation, such as copyediting, typesetting, and proofreading, as have articles published in the traditional manner. There may, therefore, be errors in Just Accepted articles that will be corrected in the final print and final online version of the article. Any use of the Just Accepted articles is subject to the express understanding that the papers have not yet gone through the full quality control process prior to publication.Just Accepted by Journal of Cosmetic and Laser TherapyComparison of Microwave Ablation, Botulinum Toxin Injection and Liposuction-Curettage in the Treatment of Axillary Hyperhidrosis: A Systematic Review
Marwan W. Nasr, Samer F. Jabbour, Roger N. Haber,  Elio G. Kechichian, Lena El HachemBackground: Primary focal axillary hyperhidrosis is a disorder of excessive sweating that can strongly impact quality of life.Objective: To compare microwave ablation, botulinum toxin injection and liposuction-curettage in the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis based on subjective and objective criteria.Methods: A systematic review of the literature published in French or English between January 1st 1991 and February 1st 2015 was completed using PubMed and Embase databases.Results: 16 out of 775 articles were selected based on relevance and criteria of inclusion and exclusion. The three methods proved to be efficient and safe however microwave ablation and botulinum toxin had better results when compared to liposuction-curettage on the short term. Both microwave ablation and liposuction-curettage showed longer lasting results when compared to botulinum toxin. However, on the long term, microwave ablation was superior to liposuction-curettage.Conclusion: Microwave ablation, liposuction-curettage and botulinum toxin injections are safe and efficient minimally invasive alternatives for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. Well-designed randomized controlled trials are needed to further compare the efficacy of these techniques.Systematic Review Marwan W. Nasra, Samer F. Jabboura, Roger N. Haberb, Elio G. Kechichianb,  Lena El Hachemc aAssistant Professor, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hotel Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon; bResident, Department of Dermatology, Hotel Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon; cAssistant Professor, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lebanese American University Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon Corresponding Author: Marwan W. Nasr, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hotel Dieu de France Hospital, Alfred Naccache Blvd, Achrafieh, Beirut 1100 2160, Lebanon. Phone number: + 961 1615300, Fax number: + 961 1615295. Email: Short title: Axillary Hyperhidrosis Treatment Background: Primary focal axillary hyperhidrosis is a disorder of excessive sweating that can strongly impact quality of life. Objective: To compare microwave ablation, botulinum toxin injection and liposuction-curettage in the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis based on subjective and objective criteria. Methods: A systematic review of the literature published in French or English between January 1st 1991 and February 1st 2015 was completed using PubMed and Embase databases. Results: 16 out of 775 articles were selected based on relevance and criteria of inclusion and exclusion. The three methods proved to be efficient and safe however microwave ablation and botulinum toxin had better results when compared to liposuction-curettage on the short term. Both microwave ablation and liposuction-curettage showed longer lasting results when compared to botulinum toxin. However, on the long term, microwave ablation was superior to liposuction-curettage. Conclusion: Microwave ablation, liposuction-curettage and botulinum toxin injections are safe and efficient minimally invasive alternatives for the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. Well-designed randomized controlled trials are needed to further compare the efficacy of these techniques. Keywords: liposuction-curettage, microwave, botulinum toxin, hyperhidrosis, excessive sweating Introduction Hyperhidrosis, or excessive sweating, can have a significant emotional, 
psychosocial and physical impact on a patient's quality of life, ultimately leading to considerable occupational and social impairments (1-3). Hyperhidrosis is classified as primary or secondary depending on its origin; it can either be generalized or localized to the axillae, palms, soles, face and groin (4). Primary or idiopathic axillary hyperhidrosis is characterized by increased sweating for at least 6 months associated with an impairment in daily activities, a frequency of at least once per week, an age of onset younger than 25 years and a positive family history (5). The exact underlying pathophysiology of primary axillary hyperhidrosis remains poorly understood. No clear cause has been identified to date. However, multiple contributing factors have been described including genetic predisposition, higher concentration of eccrine glands and complex dysfunction of the sympathetic system (6-8). Current approaches in treatment of primary focal axillary hyperhidrosis include topical antiperspirants, topical aldehyde agents, topical anesthetics, antibacterial soaps, antibiotics, topical or systemic anticholinergic drugs, subcutaneous shaving, superficial or ultrasonic liposuction, laser or microwave ablation, en 
bloc excision of tissue and thoracic sympathectomy (9-15). Botulinum toxin injection has been shown to be an effective, safe and well-tolerated therapeutic alternative that requires no downtime. It is a noninvasive technique that works by inhibiting the release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction and from the sympathetic nerve fibers supplying eccrine sweat glands (16,17). For long-lasting or permanent results, some patients undergo curettage with or without liposuction, which is an ambulatory procedure resulting in less scarring compared to radical excision of axillary skin. Since it was first described by Kesselring in 1983 in the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis, liposuction has emerged as an effective method with a short post-operative recovery time and an inconspicuous scar (18). Microwave ablation is a newly FDA approved treatment for primary axillary hyperhidrosis with promising results (19-21). Microwave devices focus heat at interface between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue causing thermolysis of sweat glands (22). Although botulinum toxin injections, liposuction-curettage and microwave ablation have been independently shown to be effective in treating axillary hyperhidrosis with 
no significant safety concerns, the comparative outcome of these treatments has not been assessed. The purpose of this article is to review all available data and compare the effectiveness and tolerance of botulinum toxin, liposuction-curettage and microwave ablation in the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis based on both subjective and objective criteria. Methodology A systematic review of the literature published between January 1st 1991 and February 1st 2015 was completed. PubMed and Embase were searched for all English or French articles describing the use of liposuction-curettage, botulinum toxin or microwave ablation in the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. The search for the liposuction-curettage group (LC) was performed using the key words: "hyperhidrosis", "suction", "curettage" and "liposuction". The search for the botulinum toxin group (BT) relied on the following key words: "hyperhidrosis" and "botulinum toxin". The search for the microwave ablation (MA) group was done using the key words: "hyperhidrosis" and "microwave". Inclusion criteria were all studies that clearly reported objective and/or 
subjective results using gravimetry and/or the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) score respectively. Exclusion criteria were: studies not written in English or French, nonhuman studies, studies using multiple simultaneous treatment modalities for the same axilla, non-detailed reporting of the gravimetry results and DLQI scores, and studies including less than 10 subjects treated exclusively for axillary hyperhidrosis. The authors independently screened all articles based on titles and abstracts. Studies deemed relevant were retrieved and further analyzed based on inclusion and exclusion criteria. Disagreements between authors were meticulously debated. Data were classified according to the method of evaluation (gravimetry or DLQI) and the following information was extracted from each article: year of publication, study design, procedure, sample size, gender, mean or median age, prior treatment, gravimetric measurements and DLQI scores, length of follow-up and complications. Results The initial search in both databases yielded 651, 111 and 13 results for BT, LC and MA respectively. Of these 775 articles, 97 were considered relevant and 
were read completely. Based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, 16 were selected and were then divided into two groups according to the method of evaluation. Ten used gravimetry to assess the efficacy of the procedure (4 BT, 5 LC and 1 MA studies) (table 1). Seven used the DLQI score to compare the quality of life before and after treatment (5 BT, 1 LC and 1 MA studies) (table 2). Figure 1 summarizes the stepwise approach for selecting and classifying the final 16 articles. The 6 LC studies were published between 2002 and 2008, included 200 patients in total, were prospective and used different curettage techniques. The 9 BT articles consisted of 5 prospective studies and 4 randomized clinical trials (RCT), were published between 2001 and 2014, included 917 patients in total, and used either onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox, Allergan, Irvine, California, USA), abobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport, Ipsen Biopharm Limited, Wrexham, United Kingdom) or incoboltulinumtoxinA (Xeomin, Merz Pharma GmbH & Co KGaA, Frankfurt, Germany) (Table 1,2). The only MA study was published in 2012, was a prospective study, included 31 patients, used the miraDry system 
(Miramar Labs, Sunnyvale, California, USA) and used both DLQI and gravimetric measurments to assess the efficacy of the treatment. Follow-up periods ranged from 1 to 24 months. MA produced the highest rate of adverse events whereas BT had the least. No life-threatening complications were reported with any modality (Table 3). The percentages of mean gravimetric improvement over time for the three treatments are described in figure 2. Microwave ablation and botulinum toxin had better results when compared to liposuction-curettage on the short term. Botulinum toxin proved to be more efficient than liposuction-curettage in the first 22 weeks following treatment. Both microwave ablation and liposuction-curettage showed longer lasting results compared to botulinum toxin. However, on the long term, microwave ablation was superior to liposuction-curettage (Table 4). Discussion Objective measurement analysis Since gravimetry yields a more objective and accurate result compared to staining procedures such as the iodine-starch test, we used it to evaluate the 
efficacy of both treatments (23,24). There is no defined normal rate of sweat production in the axillae (25), but the majority of the studies in this review considered a sweat production greater than 50 mg/min as excessive and used it as a cut-off for diagnosis (24,26-30). As shown in figure 2, the treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis with botulinum toxin yielded higher percentages of improvement within the first 22 weeks of treatment, after which the improvement with liposuction-curettage was more sustained. MA produced high and steady short and long term gravimetric improvement. Based on this observation, the practitioner needs to tailor the treatment to patient needs and concerns, balancing efficiency with durability. Botulinum toxin injection should be advised for patients seeking an immediate result and willing to undergo repeat treatments, whereas liposuction-curettage should be recommended for long-lasting effects. Only one study evaluated objectively the newly approved microwave ablation treatment but it showed good short term efficiency and long term durability. Subjective measurement analysis 
Not only should the treatment decrease gravimetric values but it should also improve the patient's quality of life. Therefore, a subjective score that assesses the impact of the procedure on quality of life is paramount. The Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) is a validated questionnaire that measures dermatology-specific health-related quality of life in six fields: symptoms and feelings, daily activities, leisure, work and school, personal relationships and treatment (31). It includes 10 questions, each graded from 0 to 3 with higher scores reflecting greater impairment. According to Hongbo et al., a total score of 0-1 reflected no effect on the patient's quality of life; scores of 2-5, 6-10, 11-20 and 21-30 reflected small, moderate, large and very large impact respectively. In all selected studies, the pre-treatment DLQI score exceeded 10 and was comparable to the baseline score of disabling conditions such as acne, pruritus, atopic dermatitis and rosacea (32-37) and the score used as an indication for biological treatment in psoriasis (38). Campati et al. noted that the impact of hyperhidrosis is not always correlated with the degree of sweat production and that the tolerance for excessive sweating varies from one patient to another (39). 
Rosell et al. demonstrated that questions 2 (embarrassment and self-consciousness), 4 (clothing), 5 (social and leisure activities), 7 (working, studying) and 8 (problems with partner, close friends, relatives) contributed the most to high pre-treatment scores. They also showed that 45% of patients treated with botulinum toxin achieved a DLQI score of 0 at 1 month after treatment (40). Similar results were obtained by Solish et al. who reported that 53 % of patients treated with botulinum toxin had no DLQI impairment at 3 months (41). In the unique liposuction-curettage study that used the DLQI score, questions 2, 4 and 5 had the highest impact on the pre-treatment values. The improvement with liposuction-curettage was of only 63.4% versus 79.3 - 96.1% in the BT group (41). The only MA study that used DLQI scores showed an early improvement in DLQI of 79%. Even 12 months following treatment, the reported amelioration reached 76% (19). In a recent report, Lupin demonstrated that these results were stable up to two years following treatment (43). The results of the DLQI score are consequently in concordance with those of the gravimetry with regards to the superiority of botulinum toxin on the short term 
and the durability of MA on the long term. Description of procedures In the BT group, two injection techniques were used. The first consisted of using a fixed dose per axilla, most commonly 50 IU of Botox (Allergan, USA) (23,24,40) or 100-200 IU of Dysport (Ipsen Biopharm, United Kingdom) per axilla or 107 +- 22 IU of Xeomin (Merz , Germany) for both axillae (21, 25, 39). The second consisted of dividing the hyperhidrotic area into squares of 1.5 x 1.5 cm (2.25 cm2) and administering a fixed dose of 2 IU of Botox (Allergan, USA) per square (38,42,43). All the studies of the LC group used tumescent anesthesia. Different types of liposuction cannulas were used for the curettage: a rasping cannula (Bochum cannula) (26,27,41), a 12-gauge cannula (46), a small 1-hole cannula (30) , an atraumatic 2 mm cannula with nine small openings (44) and an aggressive 6 mm cannula with three large openings (27,44). One study did not use a liposuction cannula for curettage but used instead a sharp no.2 spoon (48). MA treatment was done under local anesthesia in a grid pattern throughout the 
hair bearing part of the axillae using the miraDry System (Miramar Labs, Sunnyvale, California, USA) with a small range (+- 10%) of energy settings. Sweat assessment was done 30 days following the initial treatment and any residual sweating was handled during a new session with a maximum of 3 sessions (19). Duration of effect and satisfaction of patients As mentioned above, MA produced sustainable results as assessed at 24 months following treatment (43), whereas the effect of botulinum toxin in the axillae is known to last 4 to 9 months (21,45-49). Repetitive injections may further increase durability (50). Overall, botulinum toxin injections for axillary hyperhidrosis have a good patient satisfaction rate with a high percentage of patients returning for repeat injections (21,40,43,51). Interestingly, D'Epiro et al. found that the DLQI following treatment is significantly negatively correlated with the relapse free survival (43). Heckmann et al. reported a return to baseline gravimetric values after only 4 months (28). Furthermore, the cost of botulinum toxin injections is relatively high, rendering the LC and MA procedures 
attractive alternatives for patients seeking a long-lasting and cost-effective treatment. In fact, the LC studies demonstrated a reduction in sweat production exceeding 50% up to 18 months post-treatment (52) and showed that the reduction in sweating on the day following the procedure is a predictive factor of the results at 6 and 12 months (46). Adverse effects There were no life-threatening complications reported in either group. Following botulinum toxin injections, mild local, regional and general adverse effects were described (table 3), the most common being pain, stinging and irritation at the level of the axillae. In the LC group, only local and regional adverse events were reported (table 3), the most common being paresthesia, bruising and focal alopecia. MA was followed by a high rate of local and regional adverse events. In the included study, common adverse events consisted of redness and vaccum marks (87%), and edema (90%). Longer lasting effects consisted of altered sensation involving the entire limb and lasting up to 4 months (65%), and of palpable bumps under the skin of the axillae (71%). Swelling outside the axillae 
involving the chest and entire arm was also frequent. Transient neuropathy and muscle weakness of the treated arm were described and showed improvement after 6 months (19). Suh et al. reported a case of transient median and ulnar neuropathy that recovered after 12 months of intensive physical therapy (57). This review is limited by the confounding biases in the included prospective studies. The objective and subjective patient assessments were done at different time intervals making a direct statistical comparison impossible to conduct. Only one study evaluated the more recent MA treatment, thus definitive conclusions about this modality could not be drawn. Our search retrieved a randomized controlled trial comparing MA to placebo but due to lack of clearly reported gravimetric results we opted not to include it in our review (20). There could be a commercial bias encouraging the studies on BT and MA but not LC. There were also inter-study disparities as included practitioners used variable cannulas, techniques and botulinum toxin products. Finally, a publication bias exists as only published trials were considered. Conclusion 
Primary axillary hyperhidrosis can have a profound impact on quality of life, comparable to psoriasis and other devastating dermatological diseases. Liposuction-curettage, botulinum toxin and microwave ablation are attractive minimally invasive second-line treatments for primary axillary hyperhidrosis. Botulinum toxin seems to be more effective subjectively and objectively in the short term with results lasting up to 9 months, whereas the liposuction-curettage yields more sustained results. The more recently FDA approved Microwave ablation is promising and may play a determinant role in the future of axillary hyperhidrosis treatment. Further randomized controlled trials are required to conclusively assess and compare the efficacy of these techniques. - The authors have no conflict of interest to declare. - This article has no funding source. - There were no presentations related to this article. Comparison of Microwave Ablation, Botulinum Toxin Injection and Review References 
1.  Weber A, Heger S, Sinkgraven R, Heckmann M, et al. Psychosocial aspects of patients with focal hyperhidrosis. Marked reduction of social phobia, anxiety and depression and increased quality of life after treatment with botulinum toxin A. Br J Dermatol. 2005;152(2):342-5. 2.  Nahaloni E, Iancu I. [Hyperhidrosis and social anxiety disorder--the same old thing under a different cloak?]. Harefuah. 2014;153(10):595-9, 624. 3.  Gross KM, Schote AB, Schneider KK, Schulz A, et al. Elevated social stress levels and depressive symptoms in primary hyperhidrosis. PloS One. 4.  Felini R, Demarchi AR, Fistarol ED, Matiello M, et al. [Prevalence of hyperhidrosis in the adult population of Blumenau-SC, Brazil]. An Bras 5.  Hornberger J, Grimes K, Naumann M, Glaser DA, Lowe NJ, Naver H, et al. Recognition, diagnosis, and treatment of primary focal hyperhidrosis. J 6.  Haider A, Solish N. Focal hyperhidrosis: diagnosis and management. Can 7.  Frewin DB, Downey JA. Sweating--physiology and pathophysiology. Australas J Dermatol. 1976;17(3):82-6. 8.  Sato K, Kang WH, Saga K, Sato KT. Biology of sweat glands and their 
disorders. I. Normal sweat gland function. J Am Acad Dermatol. 9.  Solish N, Bertucci V, Dansereau A, Hong HC-H, Lynde C, Lupin M, et al. A comprehensive approach to the recognition, diagnosis, and severity-based treatment of focal hyperhidrosis: recommendations of the Canadian Hyperhidrosis Advisory Committee. Am Soc Dermatol Surg. 10.  Glaser DA, Galperin TA. Local procedural approaches for axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Clin. 2014;32(4):533-40. 11.  Commons GW, Lim AF. Treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis/bromidrosis using VASER ultrasound. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2009;33(3):312-23. 12.  Heidemann E, Licht PB. A comparative study of thoracoscopic sympathicotomy versus local surgical treatment for axillary hyperhidrosis. 13.  Chern E, Yau D, Chuang F-C, Wu W-M. Arthroscopic shaver with refinement for axillary osmidrosis. Int J Dermatol. 2010;49(7):813-7. 14.  Kim IH, Seo SL, Oh CH. Minimally invasive surgery for axillary osmidrosis: combined operation with CO2 laser and subcutaneous tissue remover. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25(11):875-9. 
15.  Hsu CP, Shia SE, Hsia JY, Chuang CY, Chen CY. Experiences in thoracoscopic sympathectomy for axillary hyperhidrosis and osmidrosis: focusing on the extent of sympathectomy. Arch Surg Chic. 16.  Hambleton P. Clostridium botulinum toxins: a general review of involvement in disease, structure, mode of action and preparation for clinical use. J Neurol. 1992;239(1):16-20. 17.  Odderson IR. Hyperhidrosis treated by botulinum A exotoxin. Dermatol Surg Off Publ Am Soc Dermatol Surg. 1998;24(11):1237-41. 18.  Grazer FM. A noninvasive surgical treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. 19.  Hong HC, Lupin M, O'Shaughnessy KF. Clinical evaluation of a microwave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 20.  Glaser DA, Coleman WP, Fan LK, Kaminer MS, Kilmer SL, Nossa R, et al. A randomized, blinded clinical evaluation of a novel microwave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis: the dermatologic reduction in underarm perspiration study. Dermatol Surg. 2012;38(2):185-91. 21.  Lee S-J, Chang K-Y, Suh D-H, Song K-Y, Ryu HJ. The efficacy of a 
microwave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis and osmidrosis in Asians: a preliminary study. J Cosmet Laser. 2013;15(5):255-9. 22.  Jacob C. Treatment of hyperhidrosis with microwave technology. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2013;32(1):2-8. 23.  Guttmann L. A Demonstration of the Study of Sweat Secretion by the Quinizarin Method. Proc R Soc Med. 1941;35(2):77-8. 24.  Heckmann M, Ceballos-Baumann AO, Plewig G, Hyperhidrosis Study Group. Botulinum toxin A for axillary hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating). 25.  Hund M, Kinkelin I, Naumann M, Hamm H. Definition of axillary hyperhidrosis by gravimetric assessment. Arch Dermatol. 26.  Naumann M, Lowe NJ. Botulinum toxin type A in treatment of bilateral primary axillary hyperhidrosis: randomised, parallel group, double blind, placebo controlled trial. BMJ. 2001;323(7313):596. 27.  Naumann M, Lowe NJ, Kumar CR, Hamm H, Hyperhidrosis Clinical Investigators Group. Botulinum toxin type a is a safe and effective treatment for axillary hyperhidrosis over 16 months: a prospective study. 
28.  Heckmann M, Plewig G, Hyperhidrosis Study Group. Low-dose efficacy of botulinum toxin A for axillary hyperhidrosis: a randomized, side-by-side, open-label study. Arch Dermatol. 2005;141(10):1255-9. 29.  Bechara FG, Sand M, Hoffmann K, Boorboor P, Altmeyer P, Stuecker M. Histological and clinical findings in different surgical strategies for focal axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(8):1001-9; discussion 30.  Bechara FG, Sand M, Sand D, Altmeyer P, Hoffmann K. Surgical treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis: a study comparing liposuction cannulas with a suction-curettage cannula. Ann Plast Surg. 2006;56(6):654-7. 31.  Finlay AY, Khan GK. Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI)--a simple practical measure for routine clinical use. Clin Exp Dermatol. 32.  Swartling C, Naver H, Lindberg M. Botulinum A toxin improves life quality in severe primary focal hyperhidrosis. Eur J Neurol Off J. 33.  Lundberg L, Johannesson M, Silverdahl M, Hermansson C, Lindberg M. Health-related quality of life in patients with psoriasis and atopic dermatitis measured with SF-36, DLQI and a subjective measure of disease activity. 
Acta Derm Venereol. 2000;80(6):430-4. 34.  Kiebert G, Sorensen SV, Revicki D, Fagan SC, Doyle JJ, Cohen J, et al. Atopic dermatitis is associated with a decrement in health-related quality of life. Int J Dermatol. 2002;41(3):151-8. 35.  Harlow D, Poyner T, Finlay AY, Dykes PJ. Impaired quality of life of adults with skin disease in primary care. Br J Dermatol. 2000;143(5):979-36.  Newton JN, Mallon E, Klassen A, Ryan TJ, Finlay AY. The effectiveness of acne treatment: an assessment by patients of the outcome of therapy. Br 37.  Durai PCT, Nair DG. Acne vulgaris and quality of life among young adults in South India. Indian J Dermatol. 2015;60(1):33-40. 38.  Smith CH, Anstey AV, Barker JNWN, Burden AD, Chalmers RJG, Chandler DA, et al. British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for biologic interventions for psoriasis 2009. Br J Dermatol. 2009;161(5):987-39.  Campanati A, Penna L, Guzzo T, Menotta L, Silvestri B, Lagalla G, et al. Quality-of-life assessment in patients with hyperhidrosis before and after treatment with botulinum toxin: results of an open-label study. Clin Ther. 
40.  Rosell K, Hymnelius K, Swartling C. Botulinum toxin type A and B improve quality of life in patients with axillary and palmar hyperhidrosis. Acta Derm Venereol. 2013;93(3):335-9. 41.  Solish N, Benohanian A, Kowalski JW, Canadian Dermatology Study Group on Health-Related Quality of Life in Primary Axillary Hyperhidrosis. Prospective open-label study of botulinum toxin type A in patients with axillary hyperhidrosis: effects on functional impairment and quality of life. Dermatol Surg . 2005;31(4):405-13. 42.  Bechara FG, Gambichler T, Bader A, Sand M, Altmeyer P, Hoffmann K. Assessment of quality of life in patients with primary axillary hyperhidrosis before and after suction-curettage. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;57(2):207-43.  Lupin M, Hong HC-H, O Shaughnessy KF. Long-term efficacy and quality of life assessment for treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis with a microwave device. Dermatol Sur. 2014;40(7):805-7. 44.  Campanati A, Sandroni L, Gesuita R, Giuliano A, Giuliodori K, Marconi B, et al. Treatment of focal idiopathic hyperhidrosis with Botulinum Toxin 
Type A: clinical predictive factors of relapse-free survival. J Eur Acad 45.  D'Epiro S, Macaluso L, Salvi M, Luci C, Mattozzi C, Marzocca F, et al. Safety and prolonged efficacy of Botulin Toxin A in primary hyperhidrosis. 46.  Darabaneanu S, Darabaneanu H-A, Niederberger U, Russo PAJ, Lischner S, Hauschild A. Long-term efficacy of subcutaneous sweat gland suction curettage for axillary hyperhidrosis: a prospective gravimetrically controlled study. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(9):1170-7; discussion 1177. 47.  Bechara FG, Sand M, Sand D, Altmeyer P, Hoffmann K. Suction-curettage as a surgical treatment of focal axillary hyperhidrosis: recommendation for an aggressive approach. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007;119(4):1390-1. 48.  Proebstle TM, Schneiders V, Knop J. Gravimetrically controlled efficacy of subcorial curettage: a prospective study for treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 2002;28(11):1022-6. 49.  Doft MA, Kasten JL, Ascherman JA. Treatment of axillary hyperhidrosis with botulinum toxin: a single surgeon's experience with 53 consecutive patients. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2011;35(6):1079-86. 
50.  Doft MA, Hardy KL, Ascherman JA. Treatment of hyperhidrosis with botulinum toxin. Aesthetic Surg J. 2012;32(2):238-44. 51.  Coutinho dos Santos LH, Gomes AM, Giraldi S, Abagge KT, Marinoni LP. Palmar hyperhidrosis: long-term follow-up of nine children and adolescents treated with botulinum toxin type A. Pediatr Dermatol. 2009;26(4):439-44. 52.  Lowe NJ, Glaser DA, Eadie N, Daggett S, Kowalski JW, Lai P-Y, et al. Botulinum toxin type A in the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis: a 52-week multicenter double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of efficacy and safety. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56(4):604-11. 53.  Moffat CE, Hayes WG, Nyamekye IK. Durability of botulinum toxin treatment for axillary hyperhidrosis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 54.  Lowe N, Campanati A, Bodokh I, Cliff S, Jaen P, Kreyden O, et al. The place of botulinum toxin type A in the treatment of focal hyperhidrosis. Br 55.  Hanlon L, Cahill R, Barry MC. Prospective evaluation of the efficacy of dermal botulinium toxin for primary axillary hyperhidrosis. Ir J Med Sci. 56.  Lee MR, Ryman WJ. Liposuction for axillary hyperhidrosis. Australas J 57.  Suh D-H, Lee S-J, Kim K, Ryu HJ. Transient median and ulnar neuropathy associated with a microwave device for treating axillary hyperhidrosis. Dermatol Surg. 2014;40(4):482-5.  sweat (gravimetric), % 83 at 2 weeks 81 at 12 weeks 38.6 at 36 weeks 5.1 at 48 weeks 88.3 at 4 weeks 74.8 at 16 weeks  86.7 at 1 week 86.9 at 4 weeks 75.1 at 16 weeks 81.8 at 2 weeks 57.2 at 24 weeks  62.6 at 4-8 weeks NR  Aluminum chloride Aluminium chloride , oral anticholinergic drugs , iontopheresis, oral sage preparations, botulinum age in years [range] NR NR patients Botox Dysport RCT RCT RCT Naumann et al. Heckmann et al.  Proebstle et al. (Allergan, Irvine, California, USA).  (months) (gravimetric), % 66.4 at 48 weeks 70 at 4 weeks 65 at 12 weeks 61 at 24 weeks 58 at 48 weeks 52.5 at 24 weeks 55.8 at 24 weeks 83.1 at 4 weeks 82.3 at 12 weeks 82.1 at 24 weeks 
81.7 at 48 weeks Prior treatments Aluminium chloride salts, internalsage application, anticholinergics, botulinum Topical treatments Aluminum chloride and/or NR NR in years [range] NR NR Number of female patients (%) NR NR Number of patients treated  Procedure Suction-curettage Suction-curettage Suction-curettage Study type Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Study (year) Darabaneanu et Bechara et al. Bechara et al. Irvine, California, USA).    Follow up period (months) Dermatology Life Quality Index improvement (statistics: before: after ) Median: 13: 0.5 (96) Median: 14: 1 (93) Mean: 12: 1.7 (86)  Median: 12: 4 (63) Previous treatment Local or systemic drug therapy application of acids or aldehydes, iontophoresis  Aluminum chloride, application of acids or aldehydes, Aluminuium chloride Aluminium chloride, 
anticholinergic drugs, iontopheresis NR Age in years, statistic: years (range) Median: 32.5  Mean: 36.5 Median: 27 Mean: 32.3 Female (%) NR NR Number of patients treated  Procedure Botox Botox Botox Botox Xeomin Suction-curettage Microwave ablation Study type Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Prospective Study (year) Solish et al. D'Epiro et al. Campanati et al. Rosell et al. Bechara et al. Hong et al. NR, not reported; Botox (Allergan, Irvine, California, USA), Xeomin (Merz Pharma GmbH & Co KGaA, Frankfurt, Germany).  Liposuction-curettage group Minor      Local  Stinging, pain, irritation, pruritus Bruising, superficial skin erosion, paresthesia and dysesthesia, focal hair loss, reversible bridle formation, seroma, wound infection, hypertrophic scar, skin flap necrosis, induration, pain, pigmentation Edema, redness, vacuum acquisition marks, discomfort, altered sensation of the skin in the axillae lasting up to 4 months, transient palpable bumps under the skin, axillary hair loss Regional Shoulder ache, muscular weakness movement Altered sensation in the skin of the treated limb lasting up to 12 months, transient arm and chest swelling, transient neuropathy and arm weakness.  Systemic Fatigue, hot flushes, increase in 
non-axillary sweating, dry mouth, headache and lightheadedness None None Major None None None  In primary axillary hyperhidrosis pre-treatment DLQI score exceeded 10 and was comparable to the baseline score of disabling conditions. MA and BT are more efficient than LC on the short term. BT is superior to LC in the first 22 weeks following treatment. MA and LC produce longer lasting results when compared to BT.  MA seems to be superior to LC on the long term. Neither MA nor BT nor LC has life threatening complications. BT causes the least local and regional adverse events whereas MA causes the most local and regional adverse events.  MA treatment may require 3 sessions. BT effect lasts 4 to 9 months. Repetitive injections may further increase durability.  DLQI: Dermatology Life Quality Index ; MA: microwave ablation; BT: botulinum toxin; LC: liposuction-curettage.  them. BT: botulinum toxin, LC: liposuction curettage, MA: microwave ablation, DLQI: Dermatology Life Quality Index.  botulinum toxin, liposuction curettage and microwave ablation treatments.  
