  CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................20Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1: Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilation, Outcome 1: Proportion of childrenrequiring mechanical ventilation.........................................................................................................................................................
Analysis 2.1. Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 1: Change in respiratory rate..........................................................26Analysis 2.2. Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 2: Change in arterial oxygen saturation.........................................27Analysis 2.3. Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 3: Change in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) .....27Analysis 2.4. Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 4: Duration of hospital stay (days).................................................27CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................29DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................29SOURCES OF SUPPORT...............................................................................................................................................................................29DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................30iCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis inchildrenKana R Jat1, Jeanne M Dsouza2, Joseph L Mathew31Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India. 2MBBS student, Kasturba Medical College,Manipal, India. 3Department of Pediatrics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India
Contact: Kana R Jat, Editorial group: Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group.Publication status and date: New search for studies and content updated (no change to conclusions), published in Issue 4, 2022.Citation: Jat KR, Dsouza JM, Mathew JL.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2022, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD010473. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010473.pub4.Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TAcute bronchiolitis is one of the most frequent causes of emergency department visits and hospitalisation in children up to three yearsof age. There is no specific treatment for bronchiolitis except for supportive treatment, which includes ensuring adequate hydration andoxygen supplementation. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) aims to widen the lungs' peripheral airways, enabling deflation ofoverdistended lungs in bronchiolitis. Increased airway pressure also prevents the collapse of poorly supported peripheral small airwaysduring expiration. Observational studies report that CPAP is beneficial for children with acute bronchiolitis. This is an update of a reviewfirst published in 2015 and updated in 2019.ObjectivesTo assess the eficacy and safety of CPAP compared to no CPAP or sham CPAP in infants and children up to three years of age with acutebronchiolitis.
We conducted searches of CENTRAL (2021, Issue 7), which includes the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Group Specialised Register,MEDLINE (1946 to August 2021), Embase (1974 to August 2021), CINAHL (1981 to August 2021), and LILACS (1982 to August 2021) in August2021. We also searched the US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health Organization(WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) for completed and ongoing trials on 26 October 2021.Selection criteriaWe considered randomised controlled trials (RCTs), quasi-RCTs, cross-over RCTs, and cluster-RCTs evaluating the efect of CPAP in childrenwith acute bronchiolitis.Two review authors independently assessed study eligibility, extracted data using a structured pro forma, analysed data, and performedmeta-analyses. We used the Cochrane risk of bias tool to assess risk of bias in the included studies. We created a summary of the findingstable employing GRADEpro GDT sofware.Main resultsWe included three studies with a total of 122 children (62/60 in intervention/control arms) aged up to 12 months investigating nasal CPAPcompared with supportive (or 'standard') therapy. We included one new trial (72 children) in the 2019 update that contributed data to theassessment of respiratory rate and the need for mechanical ventilation for this update. We did not identify any new trials for inclusion inContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsthe current update. The included studies were single-centre trials conducted in France, the UK, and India. Two studies were parallel-groupRCTs, and one study was a cross-over RCT. The evidence provided by the included studies was of low certainty; we made an assessment ofhigh risk of bias for blinding, incomplete outcome data, and selective reporting, and confidence intervals were wide.The efect of CPAP on the need for mechanical ventilation in children with acute bronchiolitis was uncertain due to risk of bias andimprecision around the efect estimate (risk diference -0.01, 95% confidence interval (CI) -0.09 to 0.08; 3 RCTs, 122 children; low certaintyevidence). None of the trials measured time to recovery. Limited, low certainty evidence indicated that CPAP decreased respiratory rate(decreased respiratory rate is better) (mean diference (MD) -3.81, 95% CI -5.78 to -1.84; 2 RCTs, 91 children; low certainty evidence).Only one trial measured change in arterial oxygen saturation (increased oxygen saturation is better), and the results were imprecise (MD-1.70%, 95% CI -3.76 to 0.36; 1 RCT, 19 children; low certainty evidence). The efect of CPAP on change in arterial partial carbon dioxidepressure (pCO2) (decrease in pCO2 is better) was imprecise (MD -2.62 mmHg, 95% CI -5.29 to 0.05; 2 RCTs, 50 children; low certaintyevidence). Duration of hospital stay was similar in both the CPAP and supportive care groups (MD 0.07 days, 95% CI -0.36 to 0.50; 2RCTs, 50 children; low certainty evidence). Two studies did not report pneumothorax, but pneumothorax did not occur in one study. Nostudies reported occurrences of deaths. Several outcomes (change in partial oxygen pressure, hospital admission rate (from the emergencydepartment to hospital), duration of emergency department stay, and need for intensive care unit admission) were not reported in theincluded studies.Authors' conclusions
The use of CPAP did not reduce the need for mechanical ventilation in children with bronchiolitis, although the evidence was of lowcertainty. Limited, low certainty evidence suggests that breathing improved (a decreased respiratory rate) in children with bronchiolitiswho received CPAP; this finding is unchanged from the 2015 review and 2019 update. Due to the limited available evidence, the efect ofCPAP in children with acute bronchiolitis is uncertain for our other outcomes. Larger, adequately powered trials are needed to evaluatethe efect of CPAP for children with acute bronchiolitis.P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YReview questionIs continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) better or worse than supportive treatment for children with acute bronchiolitis?BackgroundBronchiolitis is inflammation of the small airways in the lungs, and a common cause for emergency department treatment amongst youngchildren. Children with acute bronchiolitis usually receive supportive care that includes ensuring adequate hydration, with oxygen addedas needed. Treatment with CPAP involves providing positive air pressure by blowing air from a pump to keep airways open, and may beefective for children with bronchiolitis. This is an update of a review first published in 2015 and updated in 2019.Search dateWe included three small randomised controlled trials (studies in which participants are randomly assigned to one of two or more treatmentgroups) involving a total of 122 children aged up to 12 months who were diagnosed with bronchiolitis. We did not identify any new trialsfor inclusion in this update. The three studies were conducted at single centres in France, the UK, and India. All studies compared CPAPwith standard therapy.
Study funding sourcesOne study was funded by a university hospital; one reported that no funding was received; and the third study did not mention the fundingsource.Key resultsThe limited available evidence prevented any conclusions regarding the efect of CPAP on the need for mechanical ventilation in childrenwith bronchiolitis. Limited, low certainty evidence indicated that breathing improved (respiratory rate decreased) in children who receivedCPAP. The length of time children spent in the hospital was similar between the CPAP and the standard therapy groups. No children in thestudies were reported to have died. The studies did not report on time to recovery, change in partial oxygen pressure, how ofen childrenwere admitted to hospital from the emergency department, how long children were in the emergency department, or the need for intensivecare admission. There were no local nasal efects or shock as reported by one study. No children were reported to have had air in the cavitybetween the lungs and the chest wall, causing lung collapse (pneumothorax) as reported by one study. Two studies did not report on localContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsnasal efects, shock, or pneumothorax. The study added in the previous update of the review in 2019 contributed data to the assessmentof respiratory rate and the need for mechanical ventilation.Certainty of the evidenceWe found limited, low certainty evidence related to CPAP for children with bronchiolitis. The certainty of the evidence was reduced due tohigh risk of bias, losses to follow-up, selective reporting, and the wide range of values reported by the included studies.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings 1.   Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) compared to supportive treatment for acute bronchiolitis in childrenContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) compared to supportive treatment for acute bronchiolitis in childrenPatient or population: children with acute bronchiolitisSettings: inpatientIntervention: CPAPComparison: no CPAPIllustrative comparative risks* (95% CI)Assumed riskCorresponding riskNo CPAPCPAPRelative effect(95% CI)No. of partici-pants(studies)Certainty ofthe evidence(GRADE)CommentsProportion of children requir-ing mechanical ventilationFollow-up: 5 to 10 days122(3 studies)lowa,b Time to recovery(hours)Data not reported.Not estimable0(0 studies)Not estimableNo data for time torecovery were re-ported.Mean change in respiratory rate(breaths/min)91(2 studies)lowcThis outcome wasmeasured at 1 hourin Lal 2018, and 6hours in Milesi 2013.Adverse effectsOnly 1 study addressedside effects, reporting thatno side effects occurred.Only 1 study report-ed irritability in 2children.Not estimable72(1 study)
Not estimable *The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) isbased on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; RD: risk differenceGRADE Working Group grades of evidenceHigh certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it issubstantially different.Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.aDowngraded by one level due to high risk of bias in one study, participants lost to follow-up, and selective reporting (Thia 2008).bWide confidence interval (Lal 2018; Thia 2008).cDowngraded by one level due to high risk of bias in two domains (blinding of participants and personnel and blinding of outcome assessment) (Lal 2018). CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
B A C K G R O U N DDescription of the conditionAcute bronchiolitis is a frequent cause of emergency departmentvisits and hospitalisation amongst children up to three yearsof age (Hasegawa 2014; Praznik 2018; Rivera-Sepulveda 2017).Bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways of the lungs,is predominantly a viral disease that typically afects infantsand children aged up to three years. The most common causeof bronchiolitis is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) (CDC 2018).In Italy, the hospitalisation rate reported for all infants withbronchiolitis aged up to one year was 5.4% (Lanari 2015). In theUSA, hospitalisation rates varied from 1.7 to 2.1 per 100 infant-seasons. 'Infant-season' is defined as the number of childrenmultiplied by the number of seasons, for example 50 infantsseen in two seasons equates to 100 infant-seasons (Krilov 2017).Bronchiolitis occurs most frequently amongst non-breastfed maleinfants living in crowded conditions (Meates-Dennis 2005).Bronchiolitis typically presents with viral symptoms (sneezing,rhinorrhoea, and fever), which gradually progress to paroxysmalcough, wheezing, respiratory distress, and irritability. Chestfindings are non-specific and include wheezing, with or withoutfine crackles. Although not required for diagnosis, chest x-raymay reveal hyperinflated lungs with patchy atelectasis. About 5%to 6% of children hospitalised with bronchiolitis respond poorlyto treatment, and require intensive care management (Oakley2017). About 75% of children admitted to intensive care units(ICUs) require ventilatory support, and 18% of children requiringventilatory support need invasive mechanical ventilation (Oakley2017). Whilst uncommon, bronchiolitis may cause death; mortalityrates range from 0.5% to 2% (Kabir 2003; Levy 1997). Mortalityis higher in low-income countries (Scheltema 2017). Improvedintensive care support has significantly reduced bronchiolitis-related mortality (Oakley 2017).
The standard management of bronchiolitis involves supportivecare such as ensuring adequate fluid intake, antipyretics, andhumidified oxygen supplementation if hypoxia is present (Florin2017). Nebulised adrenaline, Hartling 2011a; Hartling 2011b, andhypertonic nebulised saline, Zhang 2017, have been found tobe beneficial in acute bronchiolitis. Other therapeutic options,such as corticosteroids (Fernandes 2013), antibiotics (Farley 2014),bronchodilators (Gadomski 2014), heliox inhalation therapy (Liet2015), chest physiotherapy (Roque i Figuls 2016), nebulisedrecombinant human deoxyribonuclease (Merkus 2001; Nasr 2001),and steam inhalation (Umoren 2011), have been tried with nodefinitive benefit in bronchiolitis. A recent network meta-analysisof interventions for bronchiolitis found that epinephrine pluscorticosteroids and epinephrine plus hypertonic saline were moreefective than placebo (Guo 2018). However, National Institute ofHealth and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines published in 2015and updated in August 2021 do not recommend any of thesepharmacological interventions (NICE 2021).Description of the intervention
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) keeps airways open byadministering positive pressure to the airways of spontaneouslybreathing patients throughout the respiratory cycle (Gupta 2016).CPAP may be given to infants using nasal prongs, nasopharyngealtube, or an infant nasal mask. CPAP is administered using acommercially available circuit employed in conjunction with acontinuous flow source, or a ventilator. CPAP devices may includeprovision of heated and humidified airflow. The use of CPAPhas been associated with adverse efects, including local andsystemic efects, such as nasal mucosal damage, nasal excoriation,scarring, pressure necrosis, and nasal septum distortion (Gupta2016; Lee 2002; Robertson 1996), aspiration secondary to gastricinsuflation (Kiciman 1998), pneumothorax (de Bie 2002), anddecreased cardiac output due to impaired pulmonary blood flow(Lee 2002).How the intervention might workThe peripheral airways are most severely afected by inflammationin people with bronchiolitis. In infants with acute bronchiolitis,expiratory resistance is greater than inspiratory resistance,suggesting dynamic narrowing of the airways on expiration(Bont 2009). Acute bronchiolitis is associated with increasedthoracic gas volume (air trapping) and total pulmonary resistance,with decreased dynamic compliance (Bont 2009). Infantsinitially compensate for the increased physiological dead spaceby increased respiratory rate, resulting in increased minuteventilation. Infants gradually become exhausted, and minuteventilation falls with increase in partial pressure of carbon dioxide(pCO2) and hypoxaemia. From this point, the infant may improvewith oxygen supplementation, or may progress to respiratoryfailure.
CPAP increases the functional residual capacity of lungs, whichresults in enlargement of the diameter of almost all airways,including the peripheral airways. The widening of the peripheralairways enables deflation of overdistended lungs in bronchiolitis.Increased airway pressure also prevents the collapse of poorlysupported peripheral small airways during expiration. CPAP hasbeen used in people with bronchiolitis, with benefits reported inobservational studies (Soong 1993). CPAP may prevent the need formechanical ventilation in infants with acute bronchiolitis.Why it is important to do this reviewAcute bronchiolitis is a common clinical condition afecting infantsand young children, yet no specific treatment is available exceptfor supportive therapy. CPAP is ofen used in the managementof bronchiolitis on an empirical basis (i.e. based on personalexperience without good evidence from the literature). We aimedto assess the role of CPAP for children with bronchiolitis.O B J E C T I V E STo assess the eficacy and safety of CPAP compared to no CPAP orsham CPAP in infants and children up to three years of age withacute bronchiolitis.M E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesRandomised controlled trials (RCTs), quasi-RCTs, cross-over RCTs,and cluster-RCTs were eligible for inclusion in the review.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsTypes of participantsChildren aged up to three years with a clinical diagnosis of acutebronchiolitis. We included all infants, regardless of RSV status.
Types of interventionsWe included CPAP treatment with any pressure level, and deliveredby any type of device, by any mode (nasal prongs, face mask,etc.), and for any duration, compared to no CPAP or sham CPAP.We included studies that applied CPAP at any time afer patientpresentation. We excluded studies that investigated the use ofhigh-flow nasal cannulae, as this concept is addressed in anotherCochrane Review (Beggs 2014). We included trials in which allchildren who were randomised to treatment and control armsreceived similar management in all other respects.Types of outcome measuresWe addressed the following outcomes.1. Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilation.2. Time to recovery (as defined by the study). 1. Change in respiratory rate.2. Change in arterial oxygen saturation.3. Change in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) andpartial pressure of oxygen (pO2).4. Hospital admission rate (from emergency department tohospital).5. Duration of emergency department stay.6. Duration of hospital stay.7. Need for intensive care unit admission.8. Adverse events, e.g. local nasal efects, pneumothorax, andshock.9. Mortality.Electronic searchesWe searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials(CENTRAL; 2021, Issue 7), which includes the Cochrane AcuteRespiratory Infections (ARI) Group Specialised Register, MEDLINE(1946 to 15 August 2021), Embase (1974 to 15 August 2021), CINAHL(Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature) (1981 to15 August 2021), and LILACS (Latin American and Caribbean HealthScience Information database) (1982 to 15 August 2021).
We used the search strategy in  Appendix 1  to search CENTRALand MEDLINE. We combined the MEDLINE search strategy withthe Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifyingrandomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity-maximising version (2008revision); Ovid format (Lefebvre 2021). We adapted the searchstrategy to search Embase (Appendix 2), CINAHL (Appendix 3), andLILACS (Appendix 4). We did not apply any date, language, orpublication restrictions.Searching other resourcesWe searched the US National Institutes of Health Ongoing TrialsRegister ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov) and the WorldHealth Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials RegistryPlatform (ICTRP) (apps.who.int/trialsearch/) for completed andongoing trials on 26 October 2021. We reviewed the reference listsof included studies to identify any additional studies. We contactedcorresponding authors of the included trials to enquire as to anyadditional ongoing RCTs or unpublished trials.Data collection and analysis
Selection of studiesThree review authors (KRJ, JMD, JLM) independently assessed thetitles and abstracts of studies obtained by the search to identifyany potentially relevant studies. We retrieved the full texts ofpotentially relevant studies, and all review authors (KRJ, JMD,JLM) independently assessed these for eligibility for inclusion inthe review. One review author (KRJ) corresponded with studyauthors to clarify study eligibility where necessary. We listedexcluded studies along with the reasons for their exclusion. Anydisagreements were resolved by discussion.Data extraction and managementTwo review authors (KRJ, JLM) independently extracted data usinga predefined data collection form following the guidance in theCochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins2021). We extracted the following data: source, eligibility, methods,participants and settings, interventions, outcomes, results, adverseefects, study funding source, and potential conflicts of interest. Anydisagreements were resolved by discussion.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesTwo review authors (KRJ, JLM) independently assessed the riskof bias for each included study using the criteria outlined inthe Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions(Higgins 2021). Any disagreements were resolved by discussion. Weassessed risk of bias according to the following domains.1. Random sequence generation.2. Allocation concealment.3. Blinding of participants and personnel.4. Blinding of outcome assessment.5. Incomplete outcome data.6. Selective outcome reporting.7. Other bias.We graded each potential source of bias as low, high, or unclear, andprovided quotes from the study report together with a justificationfor our judgement in the risk of bias tables. We summarised therisk of bias judgements across diferent studies for each of thedomains listed. We considered blinding separately for diferentkey outcomes where necessary. Where information on risk of biasrelated to unpublished data or correspondence with a trialist, wenoted this in the risk of bias table.We took risk of bias into account for studies that contributed to agiven outcome when considering treatment efects.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAssessment of bias in conducting the systematic reviewWe conducted the review according to a published protocol andreported deviations from it in the Diferences between protocol andreview section of the review.Measures of treatment efectWe entered outcome data for each study into data tables in ReviewManager Web to calculate treatment efects (RevMan Web 2020).We calculated risk ratio (RR) for dichotomous outcomes and meandiferences (MD) for continuous outcomes.We undertook meta-analysis only where this was meaningful, thatis where the treatments, participants, and the underlying clinicalquestion were similar enough for pooling to make sense.Unit of analysis issuesWe planned to include RCTs, quasi-RCTs, cross-over RCTs, andcluster-RCTs in the review. For cross-over trials, we considered datafrom the first study period for meta-analysis. We plan that if cluster-RCTs are included in future review updates, we will conduct meta-analyses using the generic inverse-variance method in  ReviewManager Web (RevMan Web 2020). We plan to add standard parallel-group trials to the same generic inverse-variance meta-analysis.Dealing with missing dataWe contacted investigators or study sponsors to verify key studycharacteristics and to obtain missing numerical outcome datawhere possible (e.g. when a study was identified as an abstractonly). Where this was not possible, and the missing data werethought to introduce serious bias, we explored the impact ofincluding such studies in the overall assessment of results by asensitivity analysis.If numerical outcome data such as standard deviations orcorrelation coeficients were missing and could not be obtainedfrom the study authors, we calculated these from other availablestatistics, such as P values, according to the methods describedin the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions(Higgins 2021).
Where possible, we extracted data to enable intention-to-treatanalysis, which aims to include all participants randomised intoa trial irrespective of what occurred subsequently. We calculatedand reported losses to follow-up if there was a discrepancy in thenumbers randomised and the numbers analysed in each treatmentgroup.Assessment of heterogeneityWe assessed clinical and methodological heterogeneity beforepooling. We compared inclusion and exclusion criteria amongstthe included studies to assess clinical heterogeneity. We assessedstatistical heterogeneity by looking at forest plots, using a Chi2 testand the I2 statistic. Using the Chi2 test, a low P value of < 0.1 (or alarge Chi2 test statistic relative to its degree of freedom) providedevidence of heterogeneity of intervention efects. We interpretedthe I2 statistic value as follows:1. 0% to 50%: heterogeneity might not be important;2. > 50% to 75%: moderate heterogeneity; and3. > 75%: substantial heterogeneity.Assessment of reporting biasesWe planned that if we were able to pool more than 10 trials, wewould create and examine funnel plots to explore possible small-study and publication biases.Data synthesisWe carried out meta-analyses using Review Manager Web (RevManWeb 2020). We used a fixed-efect model for pooled data analysis.We used a random-efects meta-analysis if there was important(more than 50%) statistical heterogeneity amongst studies.
Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneityWe planned to perform subgroup analyses for the following groups.1. CPAP with oxygen and CPAP with heliox.2. RSV-positive and RSV-negative children.3. Diferent CPAP pressure levels (< 6 cm, 6 cm to 10 cm, and > 10cm water level (H2O)).4. CPAP method: nasal prongs or face mask.5. CPAP duration (< 12 hours, 12 to 24 hours, > 24 hours).6. Trials with no CPAP and sham CPAP as comparator.7. RCTs and cross-over RCTs.We planned to use the Chi2 test to test for subgroup interactions inReview Manager Web (RevMan Web 2020).Sensitivity analysisWe planned to perform sensitivity analyses to test the robustnessof our results, as follows.1. Repeating the meta-analysis afer excluding studies withinadequate allocation concealment.2. Repeating the meta-analysis afer excluding studies in which theoutcome evaluation was not blinded.3. Repeating the meta-analysis imputing missing data as best-possible and worst-possible outcomes.4. Comparing the diference in pooled analysis results by usingfixed-efect and random-efects models.Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of theevidence
We created a summary of findings table presenting the followingoutcomes: proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilation,time to recovery, and change in respiratory rate (Summaryof findings 1). We used the five GRADE considerations (studylimitations, consistency of efect, imprecision, indirectness, andpublication bias) to assess the quality of the body of evidence as itrelates to the studies that contributed data to the meta-analyses forthe prespecified outcomes (Atkins 2004). We used the methods andrecommendations described in Section 8.5 and Chapter 12 of theCochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins2021), employing GRADEpro GDT sofware (GRADEpro GDT). Wejustified all decisions to downgrade the certainty of the evidence infootnotes, and made comments to aid the reader's understandingwhere necessary.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E S U L T SDescription of studiesResults of the searchWe presented search results for this update only. We identified 1260records in our August 2021 searches (Figure 1). We performed titleand abstract screening of these 1260 records, and retrieved 92 full-text reports for assessment, of which 91 studies were excluded. Onestudy was eligible for inclusion, but the same study was included inthe previous update (Lal 2018). We did not identify any new trialsfor inclusion in this update. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsIncluded studiesWe included three studies providing data from 122 children (Lal2018; Milesi 2013; Thia 2008). For details, see  Characteristics ofincluded studies.DesignAll of the included studies were single-centre trials (Lal 2018; Milesi2013; Thia 2008). Lal 2018 was described as a prospective, open-label randomised trial; Milesi 2013 as a prospective, parallel-groupRCT; and Thia 2008 was a randomised cross-over study.Sample sizesThe three included studies presented data from a total of 122children. Sample sizes ranged from 19 children (10/9 treatment/control) in  Milesi 2013, to 72 children (36/36 treatment/control)in Lal 2018. We only included data from children in the first phase ofthe cross-over RCT (31 children; 16/15 treatment/control) by Thia2008.SettingThe included studies were single-centre trials conducted in India(Lal 2018), France (Milesi 2013), and the UK (Thia 2008). Two trialsinvolved children who were inpatients (Lal 2018; Thia 2008). Thestudy by Milesi 2013 involved children being treated in a paediatricintensive care unit (PICU).Children's agesLal 2018 included children clinically diagnosed with bronchiolitis,but their age range was not clearly defined. Milesi 2013 includedinfants aged up to six months, and  Thia 2008  enrolled childrenaged up to 12 months. The mean age of children in the CPAP groupwas 6.8 +- 0.9 weeks and 10.92 +- 41.33 weeks in the trials by Milesi2013  and  Thia 2008, respectively. The respective mean ages ofchildren in the control groups were 8.2 +- 1.7 weeks and 10.5 +- 48.93weeks (Milesi 2013; Thia 2008).
Children's sexOnly Lal 2018 reported children's sex (N = 72): there were 26 boysand 10 girls in the treatment group, and 28 boys and 8 girls in thecontrol group.Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) statusMilesi 2013 included only children with RSV-positivebronchiolitis.  Thia 2008  included 20 (of 31) children with RSV-positive bronchiolitis. Lal 2018 did not report RSV status.Lal 2018  included hospitalised children with a diagnosis ofacute bronchiolitis.  Milesi 2013  included children with severerespiratory distress defined by a modified Wood's clinical asthmascore (m-WCAS) > 4; no invasive or non-invasive ventilation,including nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP),before admission to PICU. Thia 2008 enrolled children with capillarypCO2 measurements > 6 kPa.None of the children in the three included trials were reported tohave comorbidities.
Lal 2018  excluded children in imminent need of mechanicalventilation.  Milesi 2013  excluded children with underlyingcardiopulmonary or neuromuscular disease and who hadpneumothorax on chest radiograph. Thia 2008 excluded childrenwith congenital heart disease, neuromuscular disease, or mid-facedysmorphism that prohibited the use of nasal prongs, those whorequired immediate invasive ventilation, and pCO2 > 12 kPa.Lal 2018 used bubble CPAP delivered in the children's ward with aGregory circuit; the pressure generated was not reported. BubbleCPAP treatment was provided for one hour once only. Children inthe control arm received "standard care" in the form of adequatehydration and oxygen support through mask or hood for onehour once only. Children in the treatment group in the  Milesi2013  trial received nCPAP 6 cm H2O delivered using the InfantFlow Ventilator via a mask connected to a twin injector nozzlefixed to the child using a specially designed bonnet for childrenfor six hours. Children in the control group received a heated andhumidified air/oxygen mixture delivered through a nasal cannulathat allowed a maximum gas flow of 2.5 L/min (Milesi 2013).Children in the treatment group in the study by Thia 2008 received"standard treatment" (defined as minimal handling, intravenousfluids, and oxygen by nasal prongs or face mask) plus nCPAP for 12hours followed by standard treatment alone for the next 12 hours.Children in the control group received standard treatment alone for12 hours followed by standard treatment plus nCPAP for the next12 hours.OutcomesThe primary outcome in the study by  Lal 2018  was change inrespiratory rate afer the first hour of treatment; the secondaryoutcome was change in Silverman-Anderson score, and a ModifiedPaediatric Society of New Zealand Severity Score (MPSNZ-SS)before starting treatment and at one hour following the start oftreatment (Lal 2018).
The primary outcome in  Milesi 2013  was clinical score forrespiratory distress at baseline and at six hours afer beginningtreatment. Respiratory distress was evaluated with the m-WCAS.Secondary outcome measures were respiratory and cardiac rate,average blood pressure at baseline and six hours. However, theoutcome measures for this study were not clearly defined in thepublished study report, and data were taken from informationat ClinicalTrials.gov. Other secondary outcome measures weremanometric: variation of oesophageal pressure at baseline and sixhours, and gasometric: minimal fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2)necessary to reach an oxygen saturation between 94% and 98%,transcutaneous pCO2, ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen tofraction of inspired oxygen (PaO2/FiO2) (Milesi 2013).Thia 2008  assessed change in pCO2 at 12 hours of interventionas the primary outcome measure. Secondary outcomes werecapillary pH, respiratory rate, pulse rate, and the need for invasiveventilatory support (Thia 2008).Lal 2018 reported that no funding was received; Milesi 2013 wasfunded by the clinical research department of a university hospital;and Thia 2008 did not mention source of funding.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Excluded studiesWe excluded nine studies (Characteristics of excluded studies).Three studies were not RCTs (Balanzat 2006; Javouhey 2008;Smith 1993); two studies investigated comparisons that were notrelevant to the review (Cesar 2017; Milesi 2017); and four studiesinvestigated interventions that were not relevant to the review(Chidini 2011; Chidini 2015; Hough 2011; Yanez 2008). We excludedthree studies in this update (Cesar 2017; Chidini 2015; Milesi 2017).Studies awaiting classificationWe did not identify any studies awaiting classification.Ongoing studiesWe identified one ongoing study from the WHO ICTRP (Arya 2020).Risk of bias in included studiesRisk of bias assessments are presented in Figure 2 and Figure 3. Figure 2.   Risk of bias graph: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item presented as percentagesacross all included studies.Low risk of biasUnclear risk of biasHigh risk of bias  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Random sequence generation (selection bias)Allocation concealment (selection bias)Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias): All outcomesBlinding of outcome assessment (detection bias): All outcomesIncomplete outcome data (attrition bias): All outcomesSelective reporting (reporting bias)Other biasLal 2018++--+++Milesi 2013?+?++++Thia 2008??+?--? AllocationWe assessed the method of random sequence generation in twostudies as at unclear risk of bias due to inadequate reporting(Milesi 2013; Thia 2008). Lal 2018 used a computer sofware packagefor sequence generation and was assessed as at low risk of bias.Two studies used sequentially numbered, opaque, and sealedenvelopes and were assessed as at low risk of bias for allocationconcealment (Lal 2018; Milesi 2013). The method of allocationconcealment was not reported for Thia 2008 and was thereforeassessed as at unclear risk of bias.We assessed blinding of parents of included infants as at high risk ofbias for the study by Lal 2018, which was an open-label study. MilesiContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews2013 did not report blinding and was assessed as at unclear risk ofbias. We assessed Thia 2008 as at low risk of bias for this domain.Lal 2018 reported that four children in the treatment arm (twowho required mechanical ventilation and two who did not tolerateCPAP), and one child who required mechanical ventilation in thecontrol arm did not complete the intervention; we assessed thisstudy as at low risk of attrition bias because data for all randomisedchildren were included in the analysis. Milesi 2013 reported nolosses to follow-up and was assessed as at low risk of bias. Thia 2008reported that two children from the control arm (one who requiredmechanical ventilation, and another who was reallocated to theCPAP arm) did not complete the intervention and were not includedin the analysis. We assessed this study as at high risk of bias for thisdomain (Thia 2008).We assessed Lal 2018 as at low risk of bias for selective reporting,as all prespecified outcomes were reported. Milesi 2013 reported allprespecified outcomes and was assessed as at low risk of bias forthis domain. Thia 2008 did not report data for a secondary outcome(capillary pH) and was assessed as at high risk of reporting bias.Other potential sources of biasThe included studies were free of other potential sources of bias,although the funding source for Thia 2008 was not mentioned.
Efects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings 1 Continuous positive airway pressure(CPAP) compared to supportive treatment for acute bronchiolitis inchildrenWe based all results on published data. We contacted study authorsto request further details, but received no additional information.Primary outcomes1. Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilationIn Lal 2018, two children in the CPAP group (N = 36) and one child inthe control group (N = 36) required ventilation. No children in Milesi2013 required mechanical ventilation. Thia 2008 reported that twochildren in the control group (N = 15) and no children in the CPAPgroup (N = 16) required mechanical ventilation. The diference wasnot statistically significant (risk diference -0.01, 95% confidenceinterval (CI) -0.09 to 0.08; 122 children, 3 studies; I2 = 14%; lowcertainty evidence; Analysis 1.1; Figure 4). The number of childrenrequiring ventilation was not clear in Thia 2008. The trial authorsreported two children as ventilated in the baseline table, and onechild at nine hours in the study. It is not clear whether this childwas included in the two children mentioned in the baseline table.We attempted to contact the corresponding author for clarificationat the time of writing of the first version of this review, but did notreceive a reply. There was no change in the results or conclusionwhen including a third child as receiving ventilation. Figure 4.   Forest plot of outcome: 1.1 Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilation.Total
Risk DifferenceM-H, Random, 95% CI 2. Time to recovery (as defined by the included trials)None of the included studies provided data regarding children'stime to recovery.Secondary outcomes1. Change in respiratory rateData for change in respiratory rate from start to end of interventionwere available from two studies (Lal 2018; Milesi 2013). Therespiratory rate was decreased in children in the CPAP group (meandiference (MD) -3.81, 95% CI -5.78 to -1.84; 91 children, 2 studies; I2= 34%; low certainty evidence; Analysis 2.1; Figure 5). There was nosignificant change in respiratory rate between groups in the studyby Thia 2008; however, numerical values were not provided, anddata could not be pooled for meta-analysis. Decreased respiratoryrate is a beneficial efect for children with bronchiolitis. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudy or SubgroupCPAPTotalMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive care 2. Change in arterial oxygen saturationOnly Milesi 2013 provided data for this outcome. Change in arterialoxygen saturation did not difer between study groups (MD -1.70,95% CI -3.76 to 0.36; 19 children; I2 = 0%; Analysis 2.2).3. Change in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2)and partial pressure of oxygen (pO2)Two studies provided data for this outcome (Milesi 2013; Thia 2008).Change in pCO2 did not difer between children in the CPAP groupand those in the control group (MD -2.62 mmHg, 95% CI -5.29 to0.05; 50 children, 2 studies; I2 = 15%; Analysis 2.3; Figure 6). None ofthe included trials reported pO2. Figure 6.   Forest plot of outcome: 2.3 Change in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (mmHg).Study or SubgroupCPAPMeanSD
TotalSupportive careMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive care 4. Hospital admission rate (from emergency department tohospital)5. Duration of emergency department stayNone of the included trials reported this outcome.6. Duration of hospital stayTwo studies reported data for this outcome (Milesi 2013; Thia 2008).Duration of hospital stay (expressed in days) was similar betweenintervention and control groups (MD 0.07, 95% CI -0.36 to 0.50; 50children, 2 studies; I2 = 0%; Analysis 2.4).7. Need for intensive care unit admissionNone of the included trials reported this outcome.8. Adverse events, such as local nasal efects, pneumothorax,and shockTwo studies did not report data related to local nasalefects, pneumothorax, and shock (Milesi 2013; Thia 2008).  Lal2018 reported no local nasal efects, pneumothorax, or shock ineither study group, although two children in the CPAP group hadirritability. No other adverse events were reported.9. MortalityNo deaths were reported in the included studies.Subgroup and sensitivity analysesToo few included studies prevented us from performing subgroupand sensitivity analyses.D I S C U S S I O NSummary of main results
We evaluated the efects of CPAP for acute bronchiolitis in children.We included three studies involving a total of 122 children youngerthan 12 months of age. We found no diference between childrentreated with CPAP and those administered supportive care in therequirement for mechanical ventilation.Limited, low certainty evidence suggests that the respiratory rateamongst children with bronchiolitis who receive CPAP is decreased.Change in pCO2 did not difer between children who received CPAPand those who received standard treatment. Hospital stay durationwas similar between children treated with CPAP and those whoreceived standard treatment. The included studies did not assesstime to recovery, change in arterial oxygen saturation, changein pO2, hospital admission rate (from emergency department tohospital), duration of emergency department stay, or need forintensive care unit admission. Two studies reported no eventsof pneumothorax or other adverse efects such as local nasalefects and shock. One study reported no local nasal efects,pneumothorax, or shock (Lal 2018).  Lal 2018  reported that twochildren in the CPAP group experienced irritability.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsWe assessed the certainty of the evidence as low (Summary offindings 1).
Overall completeness and applicability of evidenceThe three included studies were small, with a total of 122 children.To detect a 20% diference in the primary outcome (proportionof children requiring mechanical ventilation) with 80% power, 88participants per group (total 176) are required. Data were notavailable for most of our secondary outcomes. We assessed twodomains as at high risk of bias in one included trial (Thia 2008). Wefound some evidence to suggest that CPAP for acute bronchiolitisis beneficial in decreasing respiratory rate, but evidence favouringCPAP or otherwise was lacking for other outcomes.Quality of the evidenceWe found low certainty evidence for both proportion of childrenrequiring mechanical ventilation and change in respiratory rate(Summary of findings 1). We downgraded the certainty of theevidence because of high risk of bias for incomplete outcomedata (participants lost to follow-up) and selective reporting, andwide confidence intervals (Lal 2018; Thia 2008). We assessed thecertainty of the evidence for change in respiratory rate as low dueto high risk of bias in Lal 2018, which did not blind participants(parents of children), study personnel, or outcome assessors.
Potential biases in the review processThe search strategy for this review was broad and designed bythe Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infections Information Specialist.It is unlikely that relevant studies were missed. Two review authorsindependently carried out study selection, data extraction, andanalysis. There was no blinding of participants, study personnel, oroutcome assessors, and this domain was assessed as at high riskof bias for Lal 2018 (see Characteristics of included studies). Weassessed Milesi 2013 as at unclear risk of bias for random sequencegeneration (method not reported) and blinding of participants andpersonnel (blinding not reported) (see Characteristics of includedstudies). We assessed  Thia 2008  as at unclear risk of bias forrandom sequence generation (method not reported), allocationconcealment (method not reported), and blinding of outcomeassessment (not reported), and at high risk of bias for incompleteoutcome data (two children did not complete the study and werenot included in the analysis) and selective reporting (one outcomewas not reported) (see Characteristics of included studies). Datawere not available for many outcomes, and we were unable toobtain additional information from trial authors. Thia 2008 was across-over trial, and we used data from the first trial phase for meta-analysis, which may have decreased study power.Agreements and disagreements with other studies orreviewsDonlan 2011 conducted a systematic review of CPAP use for acutebronchiolitis that included both randomised and observationalstudies. Only one study, Thia 2008, was common to both Donlan
2011 and our review. Donlan 2011 reported that CPAP reducedpCO2, respiratory rate, and m-WCAS in acute bronchiolitis, butassessed the quality of the evidence as low. Donlan 2011 also foundno conclusive evidence that CPAP reduced the need for intubation.An excluded study, Chidini 2011, compared CPAP delivered byhelmet versus facial mask. Chidini 2011 concluded that CPAPdelivered by helmet was associated with more successful treatmentoutcomes, less sedation and sores, and a similar improvement inoxygenation with respect to the facial mask in cases of acute lunginjury.Another excluded study, Yanez 2008, compared non-invasiveventilation using inspiratory positive airway pressure andexpiratory positive airway pressure plus standard treatment (studygroup) to standard treatment (control group) in 50 children withacute respiratory failure. Non-invasive ventilation was associatedwith an improvement in hypoxaemia and signs and symptomsof acute respiratory failure with protection from endotrachealintubation (Yanez 2008).Observational studies have suggested that CPAP is beneficial forchildren with acute viral bronchiolitis (Cambonie 2008; Essouri2011; Larrar 2006; McNamara 1997; Soong 1993).A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N SImplications for practiceSeveral outcomes of this review were not reported in theincluded studies, and where data were available, findings were notsuficiently precise to permit us to draw any definitive conclusionsfor most outcomes. Limited, low certainty evidence suggests adecreased respiratory rate amongst children with bronchiolitis whoreceive continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), but there is alack of evidence favouring the use of CPAP or otherwise for otheroutcomes.Implications for research
Larger, adequately powered trials are needed to evaluate theefects of CPAP in children with acute bronchiolitis. The timing andduration of CPAP application, level of CPAP, type of device for CPAPapplication, and both clinical (including side efects, e.g. vomitingand aspiration) and laboratory outcomes need to be evaluated infuture trials.A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SWe thank Sarah Thorning, former Information Specialist withCochrane Acute Respiratory Infections, for developing theelectronic search strategy for the 2015 review. We would also liketo acknowledge Liz Dooley, Managing Editor of Cochrane AcuteRespiratory Infections, for her support. We also thank the followingpeople for commenting on the draf review: Edward Grandi, RodrigoCavallazzi, Anne Greenough, Teresa Neeman, and Lubna Al-Ansary.We thank Pranita Pradhan for running the updated searches.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewLal 2018 {published data only}Lal SN, Kaur J, Anthwal P, Goyal K, Bahl P, Puliyel JM.Nasalcontinuous positive airway pressure in bronchiolitis: arandomized controlled trial. Indian Pediatrics 2018;55(1):27-30.Milesi C, Matecki S, Jaber S, Mura T, Jacquot A, Pidoux O,et al.6 cm H2O continuous positive airway pressure versusconventional oxygen therapy in severe viral bronchiolitis: arandomized trial. Pediatric Pulmonology 2013;48(1):45-51.Thia 2008 {published data only}Thia LP, McKenzie SA, Blyth TP, Minasian CC, Kozlowska WJ,Carr SB.Randomised controlled trial of nasal continuouspositive airways pressure (CPAP) in bronchiolitis. Archives ofDisease in Childhood 2008;93(1):45-7. References to studies excluded from this reviewBalanzat 2006 {published data only}
Balanzat AM, Lazarte G, Surarez V, Bonilla ME, Gighi M,Chede C, et al.Efects of diferent levels of nasal continuouspositive airways pressure (CPAP) in infants with severe acutebronchiolitis. European Respiratory Journal 2006;28(Suppl50):P1531.Cesar 2017 {published data only}Cesar R, Bispo B, Felix PH, Modolo MC, Cabo S, Souza A, etal.A randomized controlled trial of high-flow nasal cannulaversus CPAP in critical bronchiolitis. Critical Care Medicine2017;46(1):553.Chidini G, Piastra M, Wolfler A, Marchesi T, Calderini E, Conti G,et al.Noninvasive continuous positive airway pressure (NCPAP)by helmet versus facial mask: a multicenter RCT. Intensive CareMedicine 2011;135(Suppl 2):331-2.Chidini G, Piastra M, Marchesi T, De Luca D, Napolitano L,Salvo I, et al.Continuous positive airway pressure with helmetversus mask in infants with bronchiolitis: an RCT. Pediatrics2015;135(4):e868-75.Hough 2011 {published data only}Hough JL, Pham TM, Schibler A.Delivery of high flow nasalprong oxygen: the efect CPAP exposed. Pediatric Critical CareMedicine 2011;12(Suppl):A7.Javouhey 2008 {published data only}
Javouhey E, Barats A, Richard N, Stamm D, Floret D.Non-invasive ventilation as primary ventilatory support forinfants with severe bronchiolitis. Intensive Care Medicine2008;34(9):1608-14.Milesi C, Essouri S, Pouyau R, Liet JM, Afanetti M, Portefaix A,et al.High flow nasal cannula (HFNC) versus nasal continuouspositive airway pressure (nCPAP) for the initial respiratorymanagement of acute viral bronchiolitis in young infants: amulticenter randomized controlled trial (TRAMONTANE study).Intensive Care Medicine 2017;43(2):209-16.Smith 1993 {published data only}Smith PG, el-Khatib MF, Carlo WA.PEEP does not improvepulmonary mechanics in infants with bronchiolitis. AmericanReview of Respiratory Disease 1993;147(5):1295-8.Yanez 2008 {published data only}Yanez LJ, Yunge M, Emilfork M, Lapadula M, Alcantara A,Fernandez C, et al.A prospective, randomized, controlled trialof noninvasive ventilation in pediatric acute respiratory failure.Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 2008;9(5):484-9. References to ongoing studiesArya 2020 {unpublished data only}
*  CTRI/2020/06/026071.Continuous positive airway pressure(CPAP) and standard therapy in children with bronchiolitis- a comparative study. trialsearch.who.int/Trial2.aspx?TrialID=CTRI/2020/06/026071 (first received 23 June 2020). Additional referencesAtkins D, Best D, Briss PA, Eccles M, Falck-Ytter Y, Flottorp S, et al,GRADE Working Group.Grading quality of evidence and strengthof recommendations. BMJ 2004;328(7454):1490.Beggs S, Wong ZH, Kaul S, Ogden KJ, Walters JE.High-flow nasal cannula therapy for infants with bronchiolitis.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 1. Art. No:CD009609. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009609.pub2]Bont L.Current concepts of the pathogenesis of RSVbronchiolitis. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology2009;634:31-40.Cambonie G, Milesi C, Jaber S, Amsallem F, Barbotte E,Picaud JC, et al.Nasal continuous positive airway pressuredecreases respiratory muscles overload in young infantswith severe acute viral bronchiolitis. Intensive Care Medicine2008;34(10):1865-72.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.Respiratorysyncytial virus. www.cdc.gov/rsv/index.html (accessed prior to21 January 2019).Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsde Bie HM, van Toledo-Epping L, Verbeke J,van Elburg RM.Neonatal pneumatocele as a complication ofnasal continuous positive airway pressure. Archives of Disease inChildhood. Fetal and Neonatal Edition 2002;86(3):F202-3.Donlan M, Fontela PS, Puligandla PS.Use of continuous positiveairway pressure (CPAP) in acute viral bronchiolitis: a systematicreview. Pediatric Pulmonology 2011;46(8):736-46.Essouri S, Durand P, Chevret L, Balu L, Devictor D, Fauroux B,et al.Optimal level of nasal continuous positive airwaypressure in severe viral bronchiolitis. Intensive Care Medicine2011;37(12):2002-7.Farley R, Spurling GK, Eriksson L, Del Mar CB.Antibiotics forbronchiolitis in children under two years of age. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 10. Art. No:CD005189. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005189.pub4]Fernandes 2013Fernandes RM, Bialy LM, Vandermeer B, Tjosvold L, Plint AC,Patel H, et al.Glucocorticoids for acute viral bronchiolitisin infants and young children. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2013, Issue 6. Art. No: CD004878. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD004878.pub4]Florin TA, Plint AC, Zorc JJ.Viral bronchiolitis. Lancet2017;389(10065):211-24.Gadomski AM, Scribani MB.Bronchodilators for bronchiolitis.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 6. Art. No:CD001266. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001266.pub4]GRADEpro GDT [Computer program]GRADEpro GDT.Version accessed 28 June 2018. Hamilton (ON):McMaster University (developed by Evidence Prime). Availableat gradepro.org.Guo C, Sun X, Wang X, Guo Q, Chen D.Network meta-analysiscomparing the eficacy of therapeutic treatments forbronchiolitis in children. Journal of Parenteral and EnteralNutrition 2018;42(1):186-95.Gupta S, Donn SM.Continuous positive airway pressure:physiology and comparison of devices. Seminars in Fetal &Neonatal Medicine 2016;21(3):204-11.
Hartling L, Bialy LM, Vandermeer B, Tjosvold L, Johnson DW,Plint AC, et al.Epinephrine for bronchiolitis. Cochrane Databaseof Systematic Reviews 2011, Issue 6. Art. No: CD003123. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD003123.pub3]Hartling L, Fernandes RM, Bialy L, Milne A, Johnson D, Plint A,et al.Steroids and bronchodilators for acute bronchiolitis in thefirst two years of life: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ2011;342:d1714.Hasegawa K, Tsugawa Y, Brown DF, Mansbach JM, CamargoCA Jr.Temporal trends in emergency department visits forbronchiolitis in the United States, 2006 to 2010. PediatricInfectious Disease Journal 2014;33:11-8.Higgins JP, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ,Welch VA, editor(s).Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviewsof Interventions Version 6.2 (updated February 2021). Cochrane,2021. Available from training.cochrane.org/handbook.Kabir ML, Haq N, Hoque M, Ahmed F, Amin R, Hossain A, etal.Evaluation of hospitalized infants and young children withbronchiolitis - a multi centre study. Mymensingh Medical Journal2003;12(2):128-33.Kiciman NM, Andreasson B, Bernstein G, Mannino FL, Rich W,Henderson C, et al.Thoracoabdominal motion in newbornsduring ventilation delivered by endotracheal tube or nasalprongs. Pediatric Pulmonology 1998;25(3):175-81.Krilov LR, Fergie J, Goldstein M, McLaurin KK, Wade S, Diakun D,et al.National bronchiolitis hospitalization rates among pretermand full term infants: 2010-2015. Open Forum Infectious Disease2017;4(Suppl 1):695.Lanari M, Prinelli F, Adorni F, Di Santo S, Vandini S, Silvestri M,et al.Risk factors for bronchiolitis hospitalization during the firstyear of life in a multicenter Italian birth cohort. Italian Journal ofPediatrics 2015;41:40.
Larrar S, Essouri S, Durand P, Chevret L, Haas V, Chabernaud JL,et al.Efects of nasal continuous positive airway pressureventilation in infants with severe acute bronchiolitis. Archives ofPediatrics 2006;13(11):1397-403.Lee SY, Lopez V.Physiological efects of two temperaturesettings in preterm infants on nasal continuous airway pressureventilation. Journal of Clinical Nursing 2002;11(6):845-7.Lefebvre C, Glanville J, Briscoe S, Littlewood A, Marshall C,Metzendorf M-I, et al.Chapter 4: Searching for and selectingstudies. In: Higgins JP, Thomas J, Chandler J, CumpstonM, Li T, Page MJ, Welch VA, editor(s). Cochrane Handbookfor Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6.2(updated February 2021). Cochrane, 2021. Available fromtraining.cochrane.org/handbook.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Levy BT, Graber MA.Respiratory syncytial virus infectionin infants and young children. Journal of Family Practice1997;45(6):473-81.Liet JM, Ducruet T, Gupta V, Cambonie G.Heliox inhalationtherapy for bronchiolitis in infants. Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews 2015, Issue 9. Art. No: CD006915. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD006915.pub3]McNamara F, Sullivan CE.Nasal CPAP treatment in an infantwith respiratory syncytial virus-associated apnea. PediatricPulmonology 1997;24(3):218-21.Meates-Dennis 2005Meates-Dennis M.Bronchiolitis. Archives of Disease in Childhood.Education and Practice Edition 2005;90(4):ep81-6.Merkus PJ, de Hoog M, van Gent R, de Jongste JC.DNasetreatment for atelectasis in infants with severe respiratorysyncytial virus bronchiolitis. European Respiratory Journal2001;18(4):734-7.Nasr SZ, Strouse PJ, Soskolne E, Maxvold NJ, Garver KA,Rubin BK, et al.Eficacy of recombinant humandeoxyribonuclease I in the hospital management of respiratorysyncytial virus bronchiolitis. Chest 2001;120(1):203-8.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.Bronchiolitisin children: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline [NG9].www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng9 (accessed 29 October 2021).
Oakley E, Chong V, Borland M, Neutze J, Phillips N, Krieser D,et al.Intensive care unit admissions and ventilation supportin infants with bronchiolitis. Emergency Medicine Australasia2017;29(4):421-8.Praznik A, Vinsek N, Prodan A, Erculj V, Pokorn M, Mrvic T, etal.Risk factors for bronchiolitis severity: a retrospective reviewof patients admitted to the university hospital from centralregion of Slovenia. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses2018;12(6):765-71.RevMan Web 2020 [Computer program]Review Manager Web (RevMan Web).Version 1.22.0.The Cochrane Collaboration, 2020. Available atrevman.cochrane.org.Rivera-Sepulveda 2017Rivera-Sepulveda A, Garcia-Rivera EJ.Epidemiology ofbronchiolitis: a description of emergency department visits andhospitalizations in Puerto Rico, 2010-2014. Tropical Medicineand Health 2017;45:24.Robertson 1996Robertson NJ, McCarthy LS, Hamilton PA, Moss AL.Nasaldeformities resulting from flow driver continuouspositive airway pressure. Archives of Disease in Childhood1996;75(3):F209-12.
Roque i Figuls 2016Roque i Figuls M, Gine-Garriga M, Granados RC, Perrotta C,Vilaro J.Chest physiotherapy for acute bronchiolitis inpaediatric patients between 0 and 24 months old. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 2. Art. No:CD004873. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004873.pub5]Scheltema 2017Scheltema NM, Gentile A, Lucion F, Nokes DJ, Munywoki PK,Madhi SA, et al.Global respiratory syncytial virus-associatedmortality in young children (RSV GOLD): a retrospective caseseries. Lancet Global Health 2017;5(10):e984-91.Soong WJ, Hwang B, Tang RB.Continuous positive airwaypressure by nasal prongs in bronchiolitis. Pediatric Pulmonology1993;16(3):163-6.Umoren R, Odey F, Meremikwu MM.Steam inhalation orhumidified oxygen for acute bronchiolitis in children upto three years of age. Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews 2011, Issue 1. Art. No: CD006435. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD006435.pub2]Zhang L, Mendoza-Sassi RA, Wainwright C, Klassen TP.Nebulisedhypertonic saline solution for acute bronchiolitis in infants.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 12. Art.No: CD006458. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006458.pub4] References to other published versions of this review * Indicates the major publication for the study Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsC H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E S
Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID] Study characteristicsMethodsStudy design: prospective, open-label, randomised, single-centre studyStudy duration: November 2014 to March 2016*Setting: inpatient, single-centre study*Country: India*Number: total 72; treatment group (36), control (36)*Age (mean (SD))* Treatment group: 4.0 (2.6) months* Control group: 4.7 (3.1) months*Sex (m/f)* Treatment group: 26/10* Control group: 28/8*Comorbidities: noneStudy enrolment criteria: 72 children hospitalised with clinical diagnosis of acute bronchiolitis wereeligible for inclusion in the study. Bronchiolitis was defined as respiratory distress (respiratory rate >=50/min) in an infant aged from 1 month to 1 year, along with wheezing on auscultation and hyperinflat-ed lung.Exclusion criteria: infants who were in imminent need of ventilator support were excluded.   *Intervention: bubble CPAP delivered in the children's ward with a Gregory circuit*Duration, frequency: for 1 hour, once onlyControl group*Intervention: "standard care", which included maintenance of adequate hydration and oxygenation.Oxygen was delivered through mask or hood.*Duration, frequency: for 1 hour, once onlyNeed for mechanical ventilation was reported.Time to recovery was not reported.NotesFunding source: no funding receivedOther: conflict of interest stated as none.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsLow riskRandomisation in blocks of 8 using computer softwareLow riskAllocation done using sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes.High riskOpen-label studyHigh riskOutcome assessors were not blinded to the intervention.Low risk1 child in the control arm (who needed mechanical ventilation) and 4 childrenin the intervention arm (2 who needed mechanical ventilation and 2 who didnot tolerate CPAP) did not complete the study. Intention-to-treat analysis con-ducted.Low riskAll outcomes mentioned in study were reported.Competing interests: declared by authors as noneLal 2018  (Continued)  Study characteristicsMethodsStudy design: prospective, randomised, single-centre studyDuration of study: November 2006 to March 2009
ParticipantsInclusion criteria*Setting: PICU, single-centre study*Country: France*Number: total 19; treatment group (10), control (9)*Age (mean (SD))* Treatment group: 6.8 (0.9) weeks* Control group: 8.2 (1.7) weeks*Sex (m/f)* Treatment group: not reported* Control group: not reported*Comorbidities: none*RSV bronchiolitis confirmed by nasopharyngeal enzyme immuno-assay*Severe respiratory distress defined as m-WCAS > 4*No invasive or non-invasive ventilation, including nCPAP, prior to PICU admissionContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*No underlying cardiopulmonary or neuromuscular disease, and no pneumothorax on chest radi-ograph*Authorisation signed by parentsInterventionsActive intervention: nCPAP 6 cm H2O with the Infant Flow Ventilator via a mask connected to a twininjector nozzle fixed to the child by a specially designed bonnet for 6 hoursControl: infants in the control group continued to receive a heated and humidified air/oxygen mixturedelivered through a nasal cannula, which allowed a maximum gas flow of 2.5 L/minOutcomesPrimary outcomes: clinical score for respiratory distress at baseline and at 6 hours after beginning theprocedure. Respiratory distress was evaluated with m-WCAS.Secondary outcomes: respiratory and cardiac rate, average blood pressure at baseline and 6 hoursNote: outcome measures were not clearly defined in the published trial; these were taken from the reg-istered trial at ClinicalTrials.govManometric: variation of oesophageal pressure at baseline and 6 hoursGasometric: minimal FiO2 necessary to reach an oxygen saturation between 94% and 98%, transcuta-neous pCO2, PaO2/FiO2NotesFunding source: Clinical Research Department of Montpellier University Hospital Centre
The study was conducted at the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, CHU Montpellier, France over 3 consecu-tive RSV epidemic periods, from November 2006 to March 2009.Contact with study authors for additional information: yes. However, no additional information wasprovided.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskRandom sequence generation is not clearly reported. Children "were random-ly assigned" to intervention or control group.Allocation concealment(selection bias)Low riskSequentially numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes were used.Blinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias)All outcomesBlinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias)All outcomesLow riskOutcome assessors were not aware of the allocated intervention.Incomplete outcome data(attrition bias)All outcomesLow riskThere were no losses to follow-up.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)Low riskAll defined outcomes were reported.Other biasLow riskConflicts of interest: declared by authors as none
Milesi 2013  (Continued)Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews  Study characteristicsMethodsStudy design: randomised cross-over, single-centre studyDuration of study: October 2002 to March 2005ParticipantsInclusion criteria*Setting: inpatient, single-centre study*Country: UK*Number: total 31; treatment group (16), control (15)*Age (mean (SD))* Treatment group: 10.9 (4.1) weeks* Control group: 10.5 (8.9) weeks*Sex (m/f)* Treatment group: not reported* Control group: not reported*Comorbidities: noneExclusion criteria: children with congenital heart disease, neuromuscular disease, and mid-face dys-morphism prohibiting the use of nasal prongs, requiring immediate invasive ventilation, and pCO2 > 12kPa were excluded.InterventionsEligible children were randomised to receive either standard treatment plus nCPAP for 12 hours fol-lowed by standard treatment alone for the next 12 hours, or standard treatment alone for 12 hours fol-lowed by standard treatment plus nCPAP for the next 12 hours. Standard treatment was defined asminimal handling, intravenous fluids, and oxygen by nasal prongs or face mask. Nasal CPAP was ap-plied using the Infant Flow System with pressures of 5 to 6 cm H2O.OutcomesPrimary outcome: change in pCO2 at 12 hours of interventionSecondary outcomes: capillary pH, respiratory rate, pulse rate, and the need for invasive ventilatorysupport
NotesThe study was conducted over 3 winters from October 2002 to March 2005.Contact with study authors for additional information: yes. However, no additional information wasprovided.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskNot reportedAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskNot reportedBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias)Low riskIt was not possible to blind participants and personnel to the interventionsdue to the inherently different methods of administration. Unblinding was lessContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAll outcomeslikely to have introduced bias because the primary outcome was objective innature.Blinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias)All outcomesUnclear riskNot reportedIncomplete outcome data(attrition bias)All outcomesHigh risk2 children (1 who required ventilation and another who shifted to CPAP) didnot complete the intervention in the control arm and were not included in theanalysis.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)High riskA secondary outcome (capillary pH) mentioned in the study methods sectionwas not reported.Other biasUnclear riskConflicts of interest: noneFunding: not reportedThia 2008  (Continued) StudyReason for exclusionBalanzat 2006Not an RCT. Observational studyCesar 2017Wrong comparison. Study compared high-flow nasal cannula with CPAP.Hough 2011Wrong intervention. Study compared different levels of CPAP produced by high-flow nasal prongs.Javouhey 2008Not an RCT. Retrospective studyMilesi 2017Wrong comparison. Study compared high-flow nasal cannula with CPAP.
Smith 1993Not an RCT. Study compared different levels of peak end expiratory pressure in mechanically venti-lated children with bronchiolitis.Yanez 2008Wrong intervention. Study evaluated non-invasive ventilation rather than CPAP.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsRCT: randomised controlled trial Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID] Study nameContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and standard therapy in children with bronchiolitis - acomparative studyMethodsInterventional studyExclusion criteria: infant in respiratory failure and in imminent need of ventilatory support. His-tory of lung disease. Children with clef palate, tracheo-oesophageal fistula, cardiac disease, di-aphragmatic herniaInterventionsCPAP plus standard therapy versus standard therapy aloneOutcomesPrimary: to compare Silverman score between the 2 groupsSecondary: to compare SpO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, temperature, chest movements, inter-costal retraction, xiphoid retraction, nasal flare and expiratory gruntStarting date15 July 2020
Contact NotesTotal sample size: 100 Comparison 1.   Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilation1.1 Proportion of children requiring me-chanical ventilation3122Risk Difference (M-H, Ran-dom, 95% CI)  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.1.   Comparison 1: Proportion of children requiring mechanicalventilation, Outcome 1: Proportion of children requiring mechanical ventilationStudy or SubgroupTotal (95% CI)Total events:Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0.00; Chi2 = 2.32, df = 2 (P = 0.31); I2 = 14%Test for overall effect: Z = 0.15 (P = 0.88)Test for subgroup differences: Not applicableCPAPEventsTotalSupportive careEventsTotalWeightRisk DifferenceM-H, Random, 95% CIRisk DifferenceM-H, Random, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive careOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size2.1 Change in respiratory rate291Mean Difference (IV, Fixed, 95%CI)2.2 Change in arterial oxygen satu-ration2.3 Change in arterial partial pres-sure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 2.4 Duration of hospital stay (days)250Mean Difference (IV, Fixed, 95%CI)  Analysis 2.1.   Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 1: Change in respiratory rate
Study or SubgroupTotal (95% CI)Heterogeneity: Chi2 = 1.51, df = 1 (P = 0.22); I2 = 34%Test for overall effect: Z = 3.79 (P = 0.0002)Test for subgroup differences: Not applicableCPAPMeanSDTotalSupportive careMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive care  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 2.2.   Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 2: Change in arterial oxygen saturationStudy or SubgroupCPAPMeanSDTotalSupportive careMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive careStudy or SubgroupTotal (95% CI)Heterogeneity: Chi2 = 1.18, df = 1 (P = 0.28); I2 = 15%Test for overall effect: Z = 1.92 (P = 0.05)Test for subgroup differences: Not applicableCPAPMeanSDTotalSupportive careMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive care  Analysis 2.4.   Comparison 2: Clinical improvements, Outcome 4: Duration of hospital stay (days)Study or SubgroupCPAPMeanSDTotalSupportive careMeanSDTotalWeightMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIMean DifferenceIV, Fixed, 95% CIFavours CPAPFavours supportive care Appendix 1. MEDLINE (Ovid) search strategy
1 exp Bronchiolitis/2 bronchiolit*.tw.3 Bronchopneumonia/4 bronchopneumon*.tw.5 exp respiratory syncytial viruses/ or exp respiratory syncytial virus, human/6 Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections/7 (respiratory syncytial virus* or rsv).tw.8 or/1-79 Respiratory Therapy/10 Respiration, Artificial/11 positive-pressure respiration/ or continuous positive airway pressure/12 (positive pressur* adj5 (ventilat* or respir* or breath* or airway*)).tw.13 positiv* airway* pressur*.tw.14 continuous distend* pressur*.tw.15 positive end expiratory pressure.tw.16 (ppv or cpap or ncpap or nm-cpap or np-cpap or peep).tw.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAppendix 2. Embase (Elsevier) search strategy#14 *'continuous distending pressure'*:ab,ti 46*#13 *ppv*:ab,ti OR *cpap*:ab,ti OR *ncpap*:ab,ti OR *'nm-cpap'*:ab,ti OR *'np-cpap'*:ab,ti 17000*#12 *'positive airway pressure'*:ab,ti 6991*#11 ((*'positive pressure'* OR *'positive-pressure'*) NEAR/5 (*ventilat** OR *respir** OR *breath** OR *airway**)):ab,ti 5253*#10 *'artificial ventilation'*/de OR *'positive end expiratory pressure'*/de OR *'cpap device'*/de 78111*#9 *#1* OR *#2* OR *#3* OR *#4* OR *#5* OR *#6* OR *#7* OR *#8**28466*#8 *rsv*:ab,ti 7727*#7 *'respiratory syncytial virus'*:ab,ti OR *'respiratory syncytial viruses'*:ab,ti 8252*#6 *'respiratory syncytial virus infection'*/de 1132*#5 *'respiratory syncytial pneumovirus'*/de 10173*#4 *bronchopneumon**:ab,ti 2426*#3 *'bronchopneumonia'*/de 3528*#2 *bronchiolit**:ab,ti 8269*#1 *'bronchiolitis'*/exp 11323*
Appendix 3. CINAHL (EBSCO) search strategyS28 S18 AND S27 15S27 S19 OR S20 OR S21 OR S22 OR S23 OR S24 OR S25 OR S26 189,818S26 (MH "Quantitative Studies") 8,622S25 TI placebo* OR AB placebo* 20,274S24 TI random* OR AB random* 100,950S23 (MH "Random Assignment") 29,181S22 TI ((singl* or doubl* or tripl* or trebl*) N1 (blind* or mask*)) OR AB ((singl* or doubl* or tripl* or trebl*) N1 (blind* or mask*)) 14,743S21 TI clinic* N1 trial* OR AB clinic* N1 trial* 28,628S20 PT clinical trial 50,141S19 (MH "Clinical Trials+") 113,828S18 S9 AND S17 89S17 S10 OR S11 OR S12 OR S13 OR S14 OR S15 OR S16 14,880S16 TI (ppv or cpap or ncpap or nm-cpap or np-cpap or peep) OR AB (ppv or cpap or ncpap or nm-cpap or np-cpap or peep) 1,882S15 TI positive end expiratory pressur* OR AB positive end expiratory pressur* 627S14 TI continuous distending pressure OR AB continuous distending pressure 7S13 TI positive airway* pressur* OR AB positive airway* pressur* 1,306S12 TI ( (positive-pressure or positive pressure) N5 (ventilat* or respir* or breath* or airway*) ) OR AB ( (positive-pressure or positivepressure) N5 (ventilat* or respir* or breath* or airway*) ) 2,199S11 (MH "Positive Pressure Ventilation") OR (MH "Continuous Positive Airway Pressure") OR (MH "Positive End-Expiratory Pressure") 4,063S10 (MH "Respiratory Therapy") OR (MH "Respiration, Artificial") 10,565S9 S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8 1,924S8 TI rsv OR AB rsv 478S7 TI respiratory syncytial virus* OR AB respiratory syncytial virus*693S6 (MH "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections") 784S5 (MH "Respiratory Syncytial Viruses") 283S4 TI bronchopneumon* OR AB bronchopneumon* 43S3 (MH "Bronchopneumonia") 40S2 TI bronchiolit* OR AB bronchiolit* 748S1 (MH "Bronchiolitis+") 692
Appendix 4. LILACS (BIREME) search strategy(mh:bronchiolitis OR bronchiolit* OR bronquiolitis OR bronquiolite OR mh:c08.127.446.135* OR mh:c08.381.495.146.135* ORmh:c08.730.099.135* OR mh:bronchopneumonia OR bronchopneumon* OR bronconeumonia OR broncopneumonia OR mh:"RespiratorySyncytial Viruses" OR "Virus Sincitiales Respiratorios" OR "Virus Sinciciais Respiratorios" OR "Virus Sincitial Respiratorio" OR "VirusSincicial Respiratorio" OR "Virus Sinciciales Respiratorios" OR "Virus Sincicial Respiratorio" OR mh:"Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Human"OR "Virus Sincitial Respiratorio Humano" OR "Virus Sincicial Respiratorio Humano" OR mh:"Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infections" OR"Infecciones por Virus Sincitial Respiratorio" OR "Infeccoes por Virus Respiratorio Sincicial" OR "respiratory syncytial virus" OR "respiratorysyncytial viruses" OR rsv) AND (mh:"Respiratory Therapy" OR "Terapia Respiratoria" OR mh:"Respiration, Artificial" OR "RespiracionArtificial" OR "Respiracao Artificial" OR mh:"Positive-Pressure Respiration" OR "Respiracion con Presion Positiva" OR "Respiracao comPressao Positiva" OR "Positive End-Expiratory Pressure" OR mh:"Continuous Positive Airway Pressure" OR "Presion de las Vias AereasContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsPositiva Continua" OR "Pressao Positiva Continua nas Vias Aereas" OR "Airway Pressure Release Ventilation" OR "Ventilacion Liberadorade Presion de las Vias Aereas" OR "Pressao Positiva Continua nas Vias Respiratorias" OR "Ventilacao com Liberacao de Pressao dasVias Aereas" OR vlpva OR "Ventilacao com Liberacao de Pressao das Vias Respiratorias" OR "positive airway pressure" OR "continuousdistending pressure" OR ppv OR cpap OR ncpap OR "nm-cpap" OR "np-cpap" OR peep OR "positive pressure ventilation" OR "positivepressure respiration" OR "positive pressure breathing") AND db:("LILACS") AND type_of_study:("clinical_trials")W H A T ' S   N E W 15 August 2021New search has been performedOur conclusions remain unchanged.15 August 2021New citation required but conclusionshave not changedProtocol first published: Issue 4, 2013Review first published: Issue 1, 2015 DateEventDescription10 January 2018New search has been performedThe evidence for one secondary outcome (respiratory rate) wasstrengthened by the addition of a study with low certainty evi-dence. Our conclusions remain unchanged.10 January 2018New citation required but conclusionshave not changedSearches updated. We did not identify any new trials for inclu-sion. We identified one ongoing study (Arya 2020). KRJ and JLM: selected studies, independently extracted data, and approved the final version of the review.KRJ: performed analyses.JLM: critically reviewed the analysis and provided important intellectual input for the original review and review update.JMD: screened the updated search to find new eligible studies for the review.D E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S T
Kana R Jat: declared that they have no conflict of interest.Jeanne M Dsouza: declared that they have no conflict of interest.Joseph L Mathew: declared that they have no conflict of interest.S O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources*AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER Chandigarh, IndiaInternet and Library supportExternal sources*No sources of support providedContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsD I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E WWe included both the primary outcomes and changes in respiratory rate in the summary of findings table. Suficient data were not availablefor the outcome hospital admission rate to permit inclusion in the summary of findings table, as specified in the protocol.In the Assessment of risk of bias in included studies section, we assessed blinding separately for each outcome, as a given outcome mayor may not have been afected by blinding.We changed the thresholds for interpreting the diferent values of I2 (assessment of heterogeneity) to: 0% to 50% heterogeneity might notbe important; > 50% to 75% moderate heterogeneity; and > 75% substantial heterogeneity.
We added a subgroup analysis (respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-positive and RSV-negative children). We reported risk diference fordichotomous variables instead of risk ratio as stated in the protocol.Too few included studies prevented us from performing subgroup and sensitivity analyses.I N D E X   T E R M SMedical Subject Headings (MeSH)*Bronchiolitis  [drug therapy];  *Continuous Positive Airway Pressure  [adverse efects]  [methods];  Oxygen;  Partial Pressure; Respiration, Artificial;  United StatesMeSH check wordsAged; Child; Humans; InfantContinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for acute bronchiolitis in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2022 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
