Systematic reviewAcute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions: a systematic reviewM. Guarana 1, M. Nucci 2, *1 University Hospital, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil2 University Hospital, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazila r t i c l ei n f oArticle history:Received 16 May 2017Received in revised form15 August 2017Accepted 19 August 2017Available online 25 August 2017Editor: I. GyssensKeywords:CandidaemiaCutaneousInvasive candidiasisNeutropeniaSkin lesions
a b s t r a c tBackground: Neutropenic patients developing acute disseminated candidiasis may present with skinlesions.Aims: To evaluate the epidemiology of acute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions in neutropenicpatients, taking into consideration changes caused by different prophylactic strategies.Sources: A systematic review of English-language articles found via PubMed (1963e2016) was per-formed. We asked the following questions: (a) What Candida species are more frequently involved in thissyndrome? (b) Has antifungal prophylaxis changed the species causing skin lesions? (c) What are thetypical patterns of skin lesions? (d) What is the frequency of skin lesions in neutropenic patients withcandidaemia or acute disseminated candidiasis? (e) Has antifungal prophylaxis decreased the incidenceof acute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions?Content: Among 183 studies, 33 were selected, reporting 100 cases of acute disseminated candidiasiswith skin lesions in neutropenic patients. It occurred more frequently in the setting of induction therapyfor de novo or relapsed acute leukaemia, and the most frequent Candida species were C. tropicalis (68%)and C. krusei (15%). Diffuse maculopapular lesions predominated in cases caused by C. tropicalis andnodular and papular lesions in cases caused by C. krusei. Prophylaxis with fluconazole was reported in sixcases, C. krusei in five and C. ciferrii in one. The death rate was 45.4%.Implications: Two patterns were recognized: disseminated maculopapular lesions caused by C. tropicalisin patients not receiving fluconazole prophylaxis, occurring in 39% to 44% of neutropenic patients withacute disseminated candidiasis, and nodular lesions caused by C. krusei in patients receiving fluconazoleprophylaxis, occurring less frequently. M. Guarana, Clin Microbiol Infect 2018;24:246(c) 2017 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Allrights reserved.
IntroductionAcute disseminated candidiasis is a serious complication ofhaematologic patients with neutropenia [1]. The incidence of thiscomplication has greatly reduced with the introduction of flucon-azole prophylaxis in the 1990s, with a relative decrease in infectioncaused by Candida albicans and Candida tropicalis, and an increasein infection caused by the less fluconazole-susceptible speciesCandida glabrata and Candida krusei [2].While the majority of cases of acute disseminated candidiasis donot present with any specific clinical signs, some neutropenic pa-tients may present with disseminated skin lesions [3,4], usually inthe setting of candidaemia caused by C. tropicalis [5]. Two seriespublished in the 1970s reported skin lesions in 13% of cancer pa-tients with candidaemia (neutropenic and nonneutropenic) [6] and44% in neutropenic haematologic patients with candidaemia [5],respectively. However, with the introduction of fluconazole (andmore recently posaconazole) in prophylaxis [7,8], the incidencemay have decreased. Furthermore, the species causing acutedisseminated candidiasis with skin lesions may have changed.We performed a systematic review of the literature to evaluatethe frequency and epidemiology of acute disseminated candidiasiswith skin lesions in neutropenic patients, taking into considerationpossible changes caused by different prophylactic strategies.Patients and methodsData sourceA computerized search of the Medline database via PubMed wasperformed for articles published from 1963 through September* Corresponding author: M. Nucci, Hospital Universitario Clementino Fraga Filho,R. Prof. Rodolpho Paulo Rocco, 2455 Sala 4A 12 e Cidade Universitaria, Rio deJaneiro, RJ, 21941-913, Brazil.E-mail address: (M. Nucci).Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.clinicalmicrobiologyandinfection.com 2017 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.2016 in the English language using the following keywords:'candidiasis,' 'neutropenia or leukaemia' and 'skin or cutaneous.'Subsequently, hand searching was performed in the reference listsof all identified studies to find relevant articles.Study selection
We selected all types of studies that included haematologicpatients with neutropenia and candidaemia or acute disseminatedcandidiasis and provided a description of the clinical presentation,frequency and type of skin lesion, documentation of skin involve-ment by Candida and species causing infection. Reports withlimited information (including abstracts), duplicate records, reviewpapers or articles reporting skin lesions associated with infectionscaused by other pathogens were excluded. We asked the followingquestions: (a) What Candida species are more frequently involvedin this syndrome? (b) Has antifungal prophylaxis changed thespecies causing skin lesions? (c) What are the typical patterns ofskin lesions? (d) What is the frequency of skin lesions in neu-tropenic patients with candidaemia or acute disseminated candi-diasis? (e) Has antifungal prophylaxis decreased the incidence ofacute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions?Data extractionThe following data were extracted from the articles: underlyingdisease and its treatment, type of treatment (induction, consoli-dation, therapy of relapse, other), clinical presentation, frequency,pattern and site of skin lesions, species causing invasive candidiasis,information about culture and histopathology of the skin, anti-fungal prophylaxis, primary treatment and outcome. Specialattention was devoted to the type of skin lesion, species causingacute disseminated candidiasis and antifungal prophylaxis. We alsolooked at missing information in each study and the potentiallimitations caused by the lack of information. The data wereextracted independently by one author (MG) and reviewed by theother (MN).
ResultsA total of 175 articles were identified using the keywords, andeight other relevant articles were identified by manual searching ofthe reference lists. Among the 183 articles, 43 met the eligibilitycriteria. Of those, ten were excluded for the following reasons: lackof detailed clinical description (n  1/4 4), cases with skin lesions fromother causes (n  1/4 2), cases without cutaneous involvement (n  1/4 2),case reports in nonneutropenic patients (n  1/4 1) and review papers(n  1/4 1) (Fig. 1).Among the 33 studies analysed, 22 were case reports and 11were case series [3e6, 9e11, 13e15, 24e46]. Details of the studiesare shown in Supplementary Table S1.Five studies reported the frequency of skin lesions. The first waspublished in 1974 and evaluated 77 cases of disseminated candi-diasis in a 5-year period at a cancer hospital. Skin lesions werepresent in ten cases (13%) [6]. Another study evaluated 89consecutive haematologic patients with neutropenia and found 18cases of acute disseminated candidiasis, eight of which (44.4%)presented with skin lesions [5]. A third study reported 23 cases ofcandidaemia with skin lesions among 200 episodes of candidaemiaat a cancer centre (11.5%) [9]. The fourth study evaluated 28 pa-tients with acute leukaemia who developed candidaemia. Eleven(39.3%) had skin lesions [10]. The fifth study evaluated 53 consec-utive patients with candidaemia and positive cultures from othersites. Nineteen (35.8%) presented with skin lesions [11].
A total of 100 cases of acute disseminated candidiasis with skinlesions were identified. A summary of the characteristics of thecases, including the number of cases with missing information ineach variable, is shown in Supplementary Table S2. The mostfrequent underlying disease was acute leukaemia, comprising 86%of cases (54 acute myeloid leukaemia and 32 acute lymphoidleukaemia). Other underlying conditions were chronic myeloidleukaemia in blastic phase (n  1/4 8), aplastic anaemia (n  1/4 3), andmyelodysplastic syndrome, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease (n  1/4 1 patient each).The majority of cases occurred during induction chemotherapy forrecently diagnosed (31%) or relapsed (25%) patients. Of note, onlythree cases occurred during consolidation chemotherapy. The in-formation was not available in 32 cases.The most frequent Candida species was C. tropicalis (68%), fol-lowed by C. krusei (15%) and C. albicans (10%). For two patients,histopathologic diagnosis was attempted, but no organism wasrecovered.TheremainingfivecaseswerecausedbyC. guilliermondii (two cases), and C. ciferrii, C. glabrata and C. albicansplus C. tropicalis (one case each).The most frequent pattern of the skin lesions reported waserythematous or purpuric maculopapular lesions (44%), followedby purpuric or erythematous papular lesions, sometimes with apale centre (22%), nodules (17%) and subcutaneous abscess (6%).Some patients presented with a mixture of different types of le-sions, such as papules and nodules (7%). The site of lesion was re-ported in 72 cases: in 44 the lesions were located in the extremities,and in 28 they were disseminated.Skin biopsy results with description of histopathology wereavailable in 51 cases. In 35 cases (68.6%), fungal elements (pseu-dohyphae, hyphae and yeasts) were present in the dermis as well aswithin blood vessels. In four cases, the pattern was that of an ab-scess. Granulomas, necrosis within the wall of a blood vessel, leu-kocytoclastic vasculitis, and perivascular infiltrates and thrombi insmall vascular structures were also described. Positive cultures ofskin biopsy samples were reported in 41 (71.9%) of 57 cases. Themost frequent species recovered in cultures of skin biopsy sampleswas C. tropicalis (35 cases), followed by C. krusei (five cases).Involvement of other organs was reported in 44 patients, withmultiple organs such as spleen, liver, kidneys and lungs involved inthe majority of cases. Involvement of more than two organs wasreported in 26 of the 44 cases.Positive blood cultures were reported in 67 of the 68 casescaused by C. tropicalis. The most frequent type of skin lesion in suchcases was diffuse maculopapular lesions, reported in 39 (57.3%) ofthe 68 cases. The most frequent clinical presentations among the 15cases caused by C. krusei were nodular (seven cases) or papular(seven cases) lesions.Information about antifungal prophylaxis was not available inthe majority of cases (55%). Prophylaxis with fluconazole was re-ported in six cases. The species involved in these cases wereC. krusei in five and C. ciferrii in one.The majority of cases were treated with deoxycholate ampho-tericin B either alone (83%) or combined with fluconazole (6%).Other therapies included liposomal amphotericin B (4%), ampho-tericin B lipid complex (2%), miconazole (1%) and an echinocandinplus voriconazole (1%). Three patients did not receive antifungaltreatment. The outcome was not reported in only one case. Amongthe remaining 99 cases, the death rate was 45.4%.
DiscussionOur review of the literature yielded several findings. Firstly,acute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions occurs predomi-nantly in the setting of neutropenia after induction therapy for
acute leukaemia. Secondly, the typical clinical presentation is thatof maculopapular erythematous lesions disseminated through thetrunk and extremities. Thirdly, C. tropicalis was the likely agentrecovered in blood cultures and/or in the culture of skin biopsysamples if the patient was not receiving fluconazole prophylaxis. Incontrast, in patients receiving fluconazole prophylaxis, C. krusei wasthe most frequent agent. These two species accounted for 83% ofthe 100 cases. Fourthly, the mortality rate of this presentation ofacute disseminated candidiasis was high (45.4%).In this review, we sought to answer some specific questionsrelated to the presence of skin lesions in patients with acutedisseminated candidiasis. We found a broad range of terms in thedifferent published articles, such as cutaneous septic emboli,cutaneous fungal infections, cutaneous manifestations, skin rashesand candida vasculitis, many of them without definitions. There-fore, we used broad terms in our search strategy in order to identifyarticles that used different terminology. The first set of questionswas related to the most frequent Candida species causing the syn-drome of acute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions, and ifantifungal prophylaxis with fluconazole changed this scenario.Candida tropicalis was by far the leading agent, accounting for moretwo thirds of cases, followed by C. krusei, accounting for 15% ofcases. A remarkable finding was the strong association betweenfluconazole prophylaxis and Candida species: none of 68 patientswith infection by C. tropicalis had received fluconazole prophylaxis,while five of six cases reported in patients receiving fluconazoleprophylaxis were caused by C. krusei.Candida krusei emerged as a pathogen causing acute dissemi-nated candidiasis in neutropenic patients after the introduction ofantifungal prophylaxis, especially fluconazole. A retrospectivestudy at a cancer centre in the United States analysed the epide-miology of 491 episodes of candidaemia diagnosed between 1988and 1992. Candida krusei was the agent in only 20 episodes (4%).Multivariate analysis showed a strong association between infec-tion by C. tropicalis and no fluconazole prophylaxis, and betweeninfection by C. krusei and fluconazole prophylaxis [2]. Anotherstudy analysed 2019 episodes of candidaemia from North Americancentres in a 4-year period (2004e2008). Candida krusei accountedfor 2.5% of cases (51 episodes), and it occurred more frequently inpatients with haematologic malignancies, neutropenia and priorexposure to antifungal agents [12].The association between C. krusei fungemia and skin lesions wasfirst reported in 1980 [13]. The first case series was published in1992, with the description of seven patients with acute myeloidleukaemia who presented with embolic skin lesions in the settingof candidaemia due to C. krusei [14]. Another case series reported 13episodes of candidaemia due to C. krusei and compared them to 39episodes caused by C. albicans. Skin lesions were more frequent incases caused by C. krusei (23% vs. 5%). Prior exposure to antifungalagents was the only variable associated with C. krusei fungemia bymultivariate analysis [15].The third question was related to the typical patterns of skinlesions. In our literature review, we established two patterns ofclinical presentation. The first occurred in patients not receivingfluconazole prophylaxis who presented with disseminated mac-ulopapular lesions, with positive blood and skin cultures forC. tropicalis. The second was that of patients receiving fluconazoleprophylaxis who presented with nodular or papular skin lesions,and with C. krusei growing from the blood and/or skin biopsysamples.The other two questions were related to the frequency of skinlesions in neutropenic patients with candidaemia and the influenceof antifungal prophylaxis on the incidence. We found only fivestudies [5,6,9e11], with incidence rates varying from 11.5% to44.4%. This wide variation in the frequency of skin lesions is
probably a reflection of the heterogeneity of the studies, since somestudies included patients with and without neutropenia, withhaematologic and nonhematologic diseases. Of note, the twostudies evaluating only neutropenic patients with candidaemiareported incidences of 39.3% and 44.4% [5,10]. In both studies, thepatients were not receiving fluconazole prophylaxis. Therefore, wecan estimate that in neutropenic patients not receiving fluconazoleprophylaxis who develop candidaemia, the incidence of skin le-sions is between 39% and 44%. Regarding the impact of prophylaxison the incidence of skin lesions, we did not find any study toanswer this question. However, we can speculate that the incidenceof candidaemia with skin lesions in neutropenic patients receivingprophylaxis might have reduced substantially. If we consider thatno case of candidaemia with skin lesions caused by C. tropicalis willoccur in patients receiving fluconazole prophylaxis (as we observedin this systematic review), and that the large majority of cases willbe caused by C. krusei, the incidence will be very low, even if weconsider that 75% to 100% of neutropenic patients with C. kruseifungemia will developed skin lesions [14,15]. For example, a largeepidemiologic study of 333 episodes of fungemia in 145030 cancerpatients from eight European countries reported 20 cases ofC. krusei fungemia among 140 haematologic patients (14.3%), andskin involvement was reported in only 5% [16]. Therefore, consid-ering that antifungal prophylaxis with an azole agent is commonpractice in patients with acute myeloid leukaemia, acute dissemi-nated candidiasis with skin lesions is much less likely to occur.Another finding of our systematic review was the high mortalityrate of acute disseminated candidiasis with skin lesions. Theoutcome of acute disseminated candidiasis in neutropenic patientsis largely dependent on the immune status of the host, specificallyrecovery of neutropenia [17,18]. Because this information was notavailable in the majority of cases, we cannot appreciate the influ-ence of host factors on the poor outcome observed. Another factorthat may have contributed to the poor outcome was the drug usedas primary therapy. The large majority of patients received deox-ycholate amphotericin B, and only one patient received an echi-nocandin, which is considered the first option for the treatment ofcandidaemia according to different guidelines [19e21]. Indeed, theoutcome of candidaemia has improved after the introduction ofechinocandins in the treatment of candidaemia [22,23]. Therefore,it is possible that the outcome would be better if patients weretreated with an echinocandin.Our study has some important limitations. Firstly, it includesmostly case reports; secondly, the analysis is derived mostly fromolder studies, which are not representative of current standards ofantifungal prophylaxis in haematologic patients and treatment ofacute disseminated candidiasis; and thirdly, some articles did notinclude important information such as antifungal prophylaxis, de-tails of culture and histopathology of skin lesions. Despite theselimitations, our findings have important implications for clinicalmanagement. Patients with acute leukaemia and febrile neu-tropenia who develop disseminated maculopapular or nodular le-sions should have blood samples collected for culture and shouldundergo immediate biopsy of one of these lesions. Appropriateantifungal therapy should be initiated, taking into considerationthe antifungal prophylaxis and the most likely species.In conclusion, invasive candidiasis with skin lesions in neu-tropenic patients occurs mostly in patients with acute leukaemia,with two patterns: disseminated maculopapular lesions caused byC. tropicalis in patients not receiving fluconazole prophylaxis, andnodular or papular lesions caused by C. krusei in patients on flu-conazole prophylaxis. The first occurs in about 40% of neutropenicpatients with invasive candidiasis and the second seems to occurmuch less frequently. The mortality observed in this review washigh.
Transparency DeclarationMN reports grants and personal fees from Pfizer, personal feesfrom Merck, personal fees from Astellas, personal fees from Gilead,personal fees from Basilea, personal fees from United Medical andpersonal fees from Teva outside the submitted work. MG reports noconflicts of interest relevant to this article.Appendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data related to this article can be found atReferences
