REVIEW ARTICLECeftaroline fosamil for community-acquired pneumonia and skinand skin structure infections: a systematic reviewMaguy Saffouh El Hajj1 * Ricky D. Turgeon2 * Kyle John Wilby1Received: 8 September 2016 / Accepted: 15 December 2016 Springer International Publishing 2017
Abstract Background Ceftaroline is a parentally adminis-tered cephalosporin that has an in vitro expanded spectrum ofactivity compared with other cephalosporins yet data is con-flicting regarding its place in therapy. Aim of the Review Tocompare the efficacyand safetyofceftarolineagainst standardantibiotic regimens for community-acquired pneumonia(CAP) and complicated skin and skin structure infections(cSSSIs). Method The databases of MEDLINE, EBSCO, andEmbase were searched up to June 2016. Manual review ofreferences was completed and experts in the field were con-tacted for unpublished data. Randomized controlled trials ofceftaroline in CAP or cSSSI populations were included.Outcomes included clinical cure, mortality, adverse events,serious adverse events, and discontinuation due to adverseevents. Meta-analysis was used to pool results for these out-comes. We performed subgroup analyses for gram positiveinfections in CAP and infections caused by methicillin-re-sistant Staphylococcus aureus in cSSSIs. Risk of bias wasassessed for all studies. Results Six trials (three for eachindication) were included, each of which had an unclear orhigh risk of bias in at least one domain. For CAP, ceftarolinewas significantly more efficacious in achieving clinical curethanceftriaxone[riskratio(RR)1.11,95%confidenceinterval(CI) 1.04-1.19; I2 = 47%]. For cSSSIs, there was no signif-icant difference in clinical cure between ceftaroline andvancomycin plus aztreonam (RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.97-1.05;I2 = 0%). No differences were found for overall mortality,serious adverse events, discontinuation due to adverse events,and overall adverse events. Conclusion Ceftaroline is a viabletherapeutic alternative for patients with CAP and cSSSIs, yetidentified risks of bias and poor external validity preclude itfrom being recommended as a first-line agent.Keywords Antibiotics  Ceftaroline fosamil Cephalosporins  Community-acquired pneumonia  SkininfectionsImpacts on practice
*This article provides clinicians with greater under-standing of the role of ceftaroline for two pneumoniaand skin infections.*Current evidence suggests that ceftaroline could beconsidered as a therapeutic alternative for communityacquired pneumonia and complicated skin and skinstructure infections but more evidence is needed until itcan be recommended as a first line option.IntroductionThe increasing prevalence of antimicrobial resistanceamong organisms of common infections is becoming ofsignificantconcernforhealthcareprofessionalsandhealthcare organizations. Infections with resistant organ-isms can have serious consequences including prolongedhospital stays, increased mortality, longer duration of ill-nesses, reduced productivity and increased cost. Of par-ticular concern is the emergence of resistance amongElectronic supplementary material The online version of thisarticle (doi:10.1007/s11096-016-0417-z) contains supplementarymaterial, which is available to authorized users.& Kyle John 1College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, PO Box 2713, Doha,Qatar2Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus ininfections such as community- acquired pneumonia (CAP)and complicated skin and skin structure infections (cSSSI)[1].According to the World Health Organization (WHO),lower respiratory tract infections were considered the fourthmost common cause of death in the world in 2012 [2]. Themortality rate for hospitalized patients with pneumoniaranges from 4 to 18% and can reach 50% in patients who arein intensive care units [3]. Streptococcus pneumoniaeremains the predominant causative bacterial pathogen inCAP [4, 5]. Standard antibiotic therapy for CAP is generallyselected empirically and the choice depends on many factorssuch as patient comorbidities and medication cost. Examplesof antibiotics recommended by CAP clinical practiceguidelines include an antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone orthe combination of a beta-lactam plus a macrolide [3].Nevertheless, the increase in drug-resistant serotypes ofStreptococcus pneumoniae may still cause a challenge forclinicians to effectively manage pneumonia [6].cSSSIs are among the most common infections encoun-tered in the healthcare system, and are most commonlycaused by Staphylococcus aureus gram-positive cocci. Thetreatment of these infections has become increasingly chal-lenging due to rising rates of methicillin-resistant Staphy-lococcus aureus (MRSA), which is only susceptible to alimited number of antimicrobials including vancomycin [7].This highlights the needs for antimicrobial agents that aresafe and effective against these resistant pathogens.Ceftarolineisaparentallyadministeredoxyiminocephalosporin with an expanded spectrum of activity in vitrocompared with other cephalosporins, including bactericidalactivity against drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniaeand MRSA, and non-extended spectrum beta lactamaseproducing Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Escherichia coli.Ceftaroline has been considered in the literature as a ''fifthgeneration'' cephalosporin. It is administered as the prodrugceftaroline fosamil which is then converted to the activemetabolite, ceftaroline by plasma phosphates. As with othercephalosporins, it acts by binding to Penicillin BindingProteins (PBP) on bacterial cell walls leading to cell lysis. Itis approved by the the US Food and Drug Administration(FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for thetreatment of cSSSIs and CAP [8-10].
Aim of the reviewTo compare the efficacy and safety of ceftaroline withstandard antibiotic regimens for both CAP and cSSSIs.MethodLiterature searchFor this systematic review with meta-analysis we searchedMEDLINE (PubMed, U.S. National Library of Medicine,National Institutes of Health), EBSCO and Embase data-base from inception to August 2016 for reports of ran-domized controlled trials (RCTs) reported in the Englishlanguage. We combined the following keyword terms:ceftaroline, ceftaroline fosamil, PPI-0903, and TAK-599,with the subject headings pneumonia, soft tissue infections,cSSSI (complicated skin and skin structure infections),cSSTI (complicated skin and soft tissue infections) andABSSSI (acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections).Additionally, we searched clinicaltrials.gov up to June2016 for unpublished or ongoing studies, and we manuallyscreened reference lists of relevant articles. We attemptedto contact authors of relevant papers (via email) to requestadditional unpublished data.Study selection and data extraction
Inclusion criteria for the review were pre-established by theinvestigator team. We included full reports of RCTscomparing ceftaroline against any active comparator inhuman patients with CAP or cSSSI. Two reviewers inde-pendently screened all studies by title or abstract for eli-gibility. Discrepancies were resolved through discussion.Two reviewers (MH and KJW) independently extractedinformation from each study in an electronic spreadsheetand resolved any discrepancies through discussion and withinput from a third reviewer (RT). Both reviewers inde-pendently assessed studies for risk of bias as described inthe Cochrane Handbook [11]. This handbook gives com-prehensive instructions on how to assign risk of bias scoresaccording to information given by each article. We ratedeach study at low, high or unclear risk of bias in thedomains of selection, performance, detection, attrition,reporting and other biases. Other biases included pointssuch as sample size, limitations, study design flaw, stoppedearly due to a data dependent process, or had some otheridentified problems. Low risk of bias was generally docu-mented when adequate information was given regardingeach point and no sources of bias could be identified.Unclear risk of bias was documented when informationwas lacking to form an opinion. High risk of bias wasdocumented when described procedures or analysis tech-niques were known to introduce bias, as per the CochraneHandbook.The primary outcome was clinical cure as defined for eachindication in the original studies. For CAP, clinical curewas defined as total resolution of all signs and symptoms ofpneumonia or improvement of signs and symptoms to suchan extent that no further antimicrobial therapy was neces-sary. For cSSSIs, clinical cure was defined as resolution ofall signs and symptoms or improvement of signs andsymptoms to such an extent that no further antimicrobialtherapy was necessary. Outcomes were consistent betweenstudies.
Subgroup analysesFor each indication, we performed one pre-defined sub-group analysis of the primary outcome. For CAP, weevaluated whether a documented gram-positive infectionimpacted the comparative efficacy of ceftaroline. ForcSSSIs, we evaluated whether a documented MRSAinfection impacted the comparative efficacy of ceftaroline.Statistical analysisWe performed all statistical analyses using Review Man-ager Version 5.3. We present dichotomous data as relativerisk (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We ana-lyzed all randomized patients according to the group towhich they were allocated, in accordance with the inten-tion-to-treat (ITT) principle. We assumed that patients lostto follow-up before the end of the trial had not achievedclinical cure.We assessed for statistical heterogeneity by visualinspection of the forest plot and calculation of the I2
statistic. We defined I2 \ 25% as low heterogeneity,25-50% as moderate heterogeneity, and [50% as severeheterogeneity. When meta-analysis was possible becauseof acceptable clinical and methodological heterogeneity,we report the fixed-effects model summary estimate forI2 \ 25% and the random-effects model summary estimatefor I2 C 25%. We set the threshold for a positive test forinteraction for subgroup analyses at p B 0.10. We made noadjustments for multiple comparisons.We intended to assess for publication bias by visualinspection of the funnel plot, but we could not as this test isconsidered to be of little value in a meta-analysis withfewer than 10 trials [12].ResultsWe identified 224 reports, and included six RCTs, three foreach indication (Fig. 1). Supplementary Table lists studycharacteristics. The included trials assessed ceftaroline indiseased patients against comparator agents. Comparatoragents included ceftriaxone in CAP studies and vancomycinin addition to aztreonam in cSSSI studies. In one CAP trial,patients in both study groups received macrolide therapy[13]. Generally, study definitions of CAP consisted ofradiographically confirmed pneumonia with new or pro-gressive pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiograph or CTscan suggestive for bacterial pneumonia, acute illness lessthan or equal to seven days with at least three clinical signs orsymptoms of pneumonia [13-15]. The diagnosis of cSSSIincluded patients with deep extensive cellulitis, majorabscess, infected wound or abscess, or infected burn thatwarranted greater than or equal to five days of parenteralantibacterial therapy [16-18].Risk of bias results are given in Table 1. None of theincluded trials had low risk of bias in all domains. FiveRCTs adequately described sequence generation and allo-cation concealment [13-17]. whereas it was unclear in thesixth trial [18]. Five trials had a low risk of bias due toblinding [13-17]. All studies provided enough information
Int J Clin Pharmfor ITT analyses and did not have a high risk of attritionbias [13-18]. Three studies were ranked high for selectiveoutcome reporting due to lack of reporting follow-upresults [13-15] and all studies were given a high or unclearrisk of other biases [13-18]. Other bias rankings werelargely due to a lack of reporting in outcome assessmentsfor each study. The unclear ranking was given, as thisinformation was not provided.Primary outcomeClinical cureAll six trials provided sufficient data on clinical cure, asdefined in Supplementary Table. In CAP, ceftaroline wasstatistically significantly more efficacious in achievingclinical cure compared to ceftriaxone using a random-ef-fects model [risk ratio (RR) 1.11, 95% confidence interval(CI) 1.04-1.19] (Fig. 2). There was moderate statisticalheterogeneity (I2 = 47%), primarily explained by the trialby Zhong et al. [15].In cSSSI, there was no statistically significant differencein clinical cure between ceftaroline and vancomycin plusaztreonam (RR 1.01, 95% CI 0.97-1.05, I2 = 0%). For bothindications, fixed- and random-effects models did not differ.All three CAP trials reported clinical cure in subgroupsof patients with and without Gram-positive bacteria onculture. There was no difference in treatment effectbetween subgroups (test for interaction p = 0.12).Similarly, all three cSSSI trials reported no difference inclinical cure outcomes between the subgroups of patientswith and without MRSA (test for interaction p = 0.52).Secondary outcomesMortalityAll six included trials reported on all-cause mortality overstudy follow-up. There was no statistically significant
differenceinmortality between ceftaroline and control using afixed-effects model (RR 1.30, 95% CI 0.69-2.45, I2 = 0%)(Fig. 3).Adverse events: serious adverse events, discontinuationsand overallAll six included trials reported adverse events rates. Therewas no statistically significant difference between ceftaro-line and control in any of serious adverse events (RR 0.99,95% CI 0.79-1.25, I2 = 0%), discontinuation due toadverse events (RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.57-1.21, I2 = 0%), oroverall adverse events (RR 0.98, 95% CI 0.90-1.06,I2 = 7%) using a fixed-effects model (Fig. 4).Discussion
In this systematic review with meta-analysis, we found thatceftaroline was significantly more efficacious at achievingclinical cure for patients with CAP compared to ceftriax-one. We found no significant difference between ceftaro-line and comparators for cSSSIs. However, results do notoverlap the 10% absolute risk difference non-inferioritymargin. No difference in subgroups was found for thosewith or without documented MRSA cSSSIs.For clinical cure of CAP, one trial had a greater effect ofceftaroline compared to the others [15]. This trial wascompleted solely in Asian centers and differences in carestandards or supportive care procedures may have influ-enced this finding. It is also possible that these centers mayhave higher rates of resistance to control agents [13, 14].Reasons for this discrepancy are unclear and therefore mayhave biased results in favor of ceftaroline.For cSSSIs, the results must be interpreted cautiously.The included trials have poor generalizability owing todesign choices that deviate from real-world practice. Studyprotocols forbade oral step down and outpatient therapy,even in clinically stable patients, which counters currentStudySequencegenerationAllocationconcealmentBlindingIncompleteoutcome dataSelectiveoutcomereportingOtherExplanationZhong 2014 [15]LowLowLowLowHighUnclearHigh industry involvementCANVAS 1 [16]LowLowLowLowHighUnclearLacking details in outcome assessments
CANVAS 2 [17]LowLowLowLowHighUnclearImbalance in baseline characteristics andlacking details in outcome assessmentsTalbot 2007 [18]UnclearUnclearHighLowLowHighSmall sample size and lack of consistency instandard therapy between patientsInt J Clin Pharmbest practices and antimicrobial stewardship principles.Second, the comparator agents do not represent first-linetherapies recommended by infectious diseases guidelines.For example, the widely-used Infectious Diseases Societyof America (IDSA) guidelines recommend monotherapywith an antibiotic with activity against gram-positive bac-teria for cSSSIs, yet all ceftaroline cSSSI studies used acombination of vancomycin and aztreonam as the com-parator [19].We identified no statistically significant difference inmortality for either indication, which may have resultedfrom a lack of power owing to a low number of events.Alternatively, this may have been due to exclusion ofpatients admitted to the ICU, where most CAP mortalityoccurs. While mortality is largely unexpected for cSSSIs,one would expect mortality to be higher for hospitalizedpatients with CAP. However, the majority of patientsenrolled were of PORT score III, for whom risk of death isInt J Clin Pharm
generally low and use of intravenous antibiotics is typicallyunnecessary [20]. Thus, one likely explanation for the lackof difference in mortality may simply be insufficient power.No major findings were noted for safety outcomes, withceftaroline having similar adverse events and discontinua-tion rates compared to controls.The major strength of our review is the risk of biasassessment that other reviews on the topic have neglectedto include. The included studies had high or unclear risk ofbias in at least one domain that may have influenced resultsand authors' original conclusions. First, ITT was not usedfor the primary analysis and conclusions were largely madeon only the clinically evaluable populations. Fortunately,reports included sufficient information for us to extract ITTnumbers and determine relative risks based on this moreconservative and appropriate measure. Second, definitions,procedures, and results of recurrence and relapse wereinconsistently reported between studies, demonstratingpossible selective outcome reporting bias. Third, the risk ofindustry influence (studies were industry funded or authorsemployed by industry companies) was high throughout allstudies and many conclusions made by authors wereunjustifyingly in favor of ceftaroline based on the results.For example, Zhong, et al. [15] concluded that 'ceftarolineshould be used as a comparator in future clinical trialsdesigned to support the approval of new antibiotics for thetreatment of community-acquired pneumonia'. This state-ment is unfounded until ceftaroline's role is establishedwithin CAP and it becomes a gold standard comparatoragent. These bias concerns call for more conservativeconclusions regarding ceftaroline's place in therapy, asidentified below.
ConclusionAlthough our results suggest that ceftaroline is a safe andeffective therapeutic alternative for patients with CAP andcSSSIs, its place in therapy is unknown for both indica-tions. As a broad-spectrum agent, use should be reserveduntil efficacy and safety is established for patients pre-senting with resistant infections, such as MRSA. Early,widespread use may promote resistance to cephalosporinsand other beta-lactams. Therefore, we recommend thatceftaroline be reserved as a therapeutic alternative for thosepatients unable to take or tolerate standard treatment at thistime and that clinicians continue to employ good antimi-crobial stewardship principles, including switching fromceftaroline to a more targeted antibiotic once bacterialculture and susceptibilities become available.Funding No funding was received for this manuscript.Conflicts of interest All authors report no conflicts of interest.
References1. World Health Orgnanization. WHO Antimicrobial Resistance Glo-bal Report on Surveillance. 2014. Int J Clin Pharm 8 Sep 2016.3. Prina E, Ranzani OT, Torres A. Community-acquired pneumonia.Lancet. 2015;386:1097-108.4. Niederman MS, Luna CM. Community-acquired pneumoniaguidelines. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;33:298-310.5. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, Bartlett JG, CampbellGD, Dean NC, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the man-agement of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin InfectDis. 2007;44:S27-72.6. Van Bambeke F, Reinert RR, Appelbaum PC, Tulkens PM,Peetermans WE. Multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniaeinfections:currentandfuturetherapeuticoptions.Drugs.2007;67:2355-82.7. Pollack CV, Amin A, Ford WT, Finley R, Kaye KS, Nguyen HH,et al. Acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections (ABSSSI)practice guidelines for management and care transitions in theemergencydepartmentandhospital.JEmergMed.2015;48:508-19.8. Iizawa Y, Nagai J, Ishikawa T, Hashiguchi S, Nakao M, MiyakeA, et al. In vitro antimicrobial activity of T-91825, a novel anti-MRSA cephalosporin, and in vivo anti-MRSA activity of itsprodrug, TAK-599. J Infect Chemother. 2004;10:146-56.9. Sader HS, Fritsche TR, Kaniga K, Ge Y, Jones RN. Antimicrobialactivity and spectrum of PPI-0903M (T-91825), a novel cepha-losporin, tested against a worldwide collection of clinical strains.Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2005;49:3501-12.10. Shirley DA, Heil EL, Johnson JK. Ceftaroline fosamil: a briefclinical review. Infect Dis Ther. 2013;2:95-110.11. Higgins JPT, Altman DG, Sterne JAC. Chapter 8: assessing riskof bias in included studies. In: Higgins JPT, Green S, editors.Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions ver-sion 5.1.0. Oxford: The Cochrane Collaboration; 2008.12. Sterne JAC, Egger M, Moher D. Chapter 10: addressing reportingbiases. In: Higgins JPT, Green S, editors. Cochrane handbook for
systematic reviews of interventions version 5.1.0. Oxford: TheCochrane Collaboration; 2011.13. File TM Jr, Low DE, Eckburg PB, Talbot GH, Friedland HD, LeeJ, et al. FOCUS 1: a randomized, double-blinded, multicentre,Phase III trial of the efficacy and safety of ceftaroline fosamilversus ceftriaxone in community-acquired pneumonia. J Antimi-crob Chemother. 2011;66(3 suppl):iii19-32.14. Low DE, File TM Jr, Eckburg PB, Talbot GH, Friedland HD, LeeJ, et al. FOCUS 2: a randomized, double-blinded, multicentre,Phase III trial of the efficacy and safety of ceftaroline fosamilversus ceftriaxone in community-acquired pneumonia. J Antimi-crob Chemother. 2011;66(3 suppl):iii33-44.15. Zhong NS, Sun T, Zhuo C, D'Souza G, Lee SH, Lan NH, et al.Ceftaroline fosamil versus ceftriaxone for the treatment of Asianpatients with community-acquired pneumonia: a randomised,controlled, double-blind, phase 3, non-inferiority with nestedsuperiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015;15:161-71.16. Corey GR, Wilcox MH, Talbot GH, Thye D, Friedland D, Bac-ulik T, et al. CANVAS 1: the first Phase III, randomized, double-blind study evaluating ceftaroline fosamil for the treatment ofpatients with complicated skin and skin structure infections.J Antimicrob Chemother. 2010;65(4 suppl):iv41-51.17. Wilcox MH, Corey GR, Talbot GH, Thye D, Friedland D, Bac-ulik T, et al. CANVAS 2: the second Phase III, randomized,double-blind study evaluating ceftaroline fosamil for the treat-ment of patients with complicated skin and skin structure infec-tions. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2010;65(4 suppl):iv53-65.18. Talbot GH, Thye D, Das A, Ge Y. Phase 2 study of ceftarolineversus standard therapy in treatment of complicated skin and skinstructureinfections.AntimicrobAgentsChemother.2007;51:3612-6.19. Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, Dellinger EP, GoldsteinEJC, Gorbach SL, et al. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis andmanagement of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by theInfectiousDiseasesSocietyofAmerica.ClinInfectDis.2014;29(2):e10-52.20. Aujesky D, Fine MJ. The pneumonia severity index: a decadeafter the initial derivation and validation. Clin Infect Dis.2008;47(3 Suppl):S133-9.
Int J Clin Pharm
