Quantitative Evaluations of Time-Course andTreatment Effects of Systemic Agents forPsoriasis: A Model-Based Meta-AnalysisT Checchio1, S Ahadieh1, P Gupta1, J Mandema2, L Puig3, R Wolk1, H Valdez4, H Tan1,S Krishnaswami1, A Tallman4, M Kaur5 and K Ito1Aggregate data model-based meta-analysis is a regression approach to compare the dose-response and/or time-courseacross different treatments using summary level data from the literature. Literature search and systematic review followingthe Cochrane approach yielded 912 sources for investigational and approved treatments for psoriasis. In addition, data fortofacitinib were obtained from an internal database. Tofacitinib is an oral Janus kinase inhibitor. Two mathematical modelswere developed for Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) response in moderate to severe psoriasis patients to quantifythe time to maximum effect for PASI75 and to evaluate the dose-response relationship for PASI responders (PASI50,PASI75, PASI90, PASI100) at Week 12. Body weight exhibited an inverse effect on the placebo component of both models,suggesting that body weight affects the overall PASI response regardless of drug. This analysis provides a quantitativeframework for efficacy comparisons across psoriasis treatments.Study Highlights
WHAT IS THE CURRENT KNOWLEDGE ON THETOPIC? Treatment options for patients with moderate to severe pso-riasis include oral and injectable/infusible systemic medication.However, quantitative comparison for the treatment effectacross drugs remains unknown.WHAT QUESTION DID THIS STUDY ADDRESS? Two mathematical models were developed for Psoriasis Areaand Severity Index response to evaluate the magnitude of effectand the onset of the effect (time course of the treatment) foreach drug. The impact of body weight (covariate) was alsotested.WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS TO OUR KNOWLEDGE This analysis furthered the understanding of psoriatic treat-ments by providing a framework for efficacy comparisons acrosssystemic drugs. It also suggests that decisions to increase thedose may be particularly beneficial to heavier patients if theyfail to show meaningful responses at lower doses.HOW THIS MIGHT CHANGE CLINICAL PHARMA-COLOGY OR TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE This model-based meta-analysis based on a systematic litera-ture review provides a quantitative understanding of pharmaco-dynamics across drugs and may allow better dose selections.Psoriasis is a common chronic skin disorder typically character-ized by erythematous papules and plaques with a silver scale,although other clinical presentations also occur.1 Management ofpsoriasis may involve topical and systemic medications, photo-therapy, stress reduction, climatotherapy, and various adjunctsbased on individual patients' clinical situations.2Aggregate data (study-level) model-based meta-analysis is aregression approach to compare the dose-response and/or time-course across different treatments by using data from the literature.As more drugs become available to treat patients, the compilationof clinical responses across drugs provides a better understandingof whether newer agents offer greater pharmacological benefitcompared with existing ones, including faster onset of action,increased efficacy, and/or better safety profiles.
In this analysis, data from the literature on Psoriasis Area andSeverity Index (PASI) response in patients with moderate to severepsoriasis were collected for both investigational and marketeddrugs. Data for tofacitinib were obtained from an internal Pfizerdatabase (all tofacitinib studies used in this analysis have been pub-lished). Tofacitinib is an oral Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor. An oraltablet of tofacitinib dosed as 5 mg or 10 mg twice daily (b.i.d.) wasdemonstrated to be efficacious for the treatment of moderate tosevere psoriasis in four phase III clinical studies.3-5To evaluate the magnitude and onset of the drug effect, twomathematical models were developed: 1) a longitudinal model toquantify the time course of PASI75 (primary clinical endpointrepresentingtheproportionofpatientsachieving75%1Pfizer Inc, Groton, Connecticut, USA; 2Quantitative Solutions Inc., Menlo Park, California, USA; 3Department of Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i SantPau, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona Medical School, Barcelona, Spain; 4Pfizer Inc, New York, New York, USA; 5Pfizer Inc, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, USA.Correspondence: K Ito first two authors contributed equally to this work.Received 7 October 2016; accepted 2 May 2017; advance online publication 8 May 2017. doi:10.1002/cpt.732
reduction in PASI score from baseline), and 2) a landmark modelto quantify the dose-response relationship for PASI responders(PASI50, PASI75, PASI90, PASI100) at Week 12 (primary effi-cacy timepoint in the majority of studies; primary efficacy time-points ranged from 10-24 weeks across all studies). The impactof body weight was tested in both models. The results from thetwo models were compared, and the predictive performance forPASI response was assessed. This analysis allows a quantitativeunderstanding of treatment options for patients with psoriasis byproviding a framework for efficacy comparisons across systemicagents.RESULTSAvailable dataThe literature search yielded 912 abstracts, of which 151 studieswere identified for potential inclusion in the analyses. Followingapplication of additional inclusion/exclusion criteria, the finalanalysis included 71 studies for landmark and 57 studies for lon-gitudinal analyses (Figure 1; Supplementary Material).The final database included interleukin (IL)-12/23 inhibitors(ustekinumab, briakinumab), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-ainhibitors (adalimumab, etanercept, certolizumab, infliximab),IL-17 inhibitors (secukinumab, ixekizumab, brodalumab), T-lymphocyte (CD2) antagonist (alefacept), phosphodiesterase-4
(PDE4) inhibitor (apremilast), JAK inhibitors (tofacitinib, barici-tinib), and traditional oral agents (methotrexate, cyclosporine,acitretin). All drugs were included in the landmark model; how-ever, the longitudinal model did not include cyclosporine, acitre-tin, or baricitinib due to insufficient longitudinal data.Longitudinal modelThe temporal relationship between dose and PASI75 responsewas adequately described by the longitudinal model. PASI75response increased toward a maximum that eventually plateauedover time for most treatments. The PASI75 time course curvesfor the model-predicted PASI75 were overlaid with the observeddata for each drug (Figure 2).ET50 and ET90 (the time to reach 50% and 90% of the maxi-mal treatment effect (Emax)) were estimated from the model(Table 1). Emax was achieved by Week 12 for the majority ofdrugs except alefacept (estimated ET50 for alefacept was 11.1weeks; ET90 was not able to be estimated from available data).The mean (standard deviation (SD)) ET50 across all drugs was6.48 (2.06) weeks, and ranged from 3.7-9.2 weeks, with theexception of alefacept (Table 1; Figure 2). The mean (SD) ET90across all drugs, excluding alefacept, was 12.6 (2.92) weeks. Atrend between ET50 and Emax was detected, such that drugs withhigher Emax tended to have a shorter ET50 than those with lowerARTICLESEmax. For example, the IL-17 inhibitors were predicted to achieveET50 following 4 weeks of treatment. Correspondingly, thepredicted PASI75 response for IL-17 inhibitors ranged from 22-
49% at 4 weeks and reached 80% at 12 weeks. In contrast, othersystemic agents with longer ET50, such as methotrexate and alefa-cept, had lower PASI75 responses (less than 30% at 12 weeks).ARTICLESTreatment effect was well-characterized by an Emax model witha different Emax and potency (ED50; dose achieving 50% of maxi-mal response) for each drug within each class. Body weight wasshown to have an inverse relationship with both the placeboresponse (B) and the rate constant of drug effect (kdrug), in whichthe rate constant describes the time-course component in themodel. The median body weight effect estimates (95% confidenceinterval) in the final model for the maximal placebo effect andthe rate constant of drug effect were -0.193 [-0.277, -0.119]and -0.867 [-1.32, -0.496], respectively (from nonparametricbootstrap; N 5 1,000); both excluded 0. The final parameter esti-mates for the longitudinal model are presented in Supplemen-tary Table 1.Landmark modelDose-response for PASI endpoints (PASI50, 75, 90, and 100)was well characterized by a sigmoidal Emax function with a differ-ent Emax for each drug class and different ED50 for every drugwithin each class. The final parameter estimates for the landmarkmodel are presented in Supplementary Table 2. The dose-DrugClinical doseET50 (Week)ET90 (Week)PASI75 (%)Week 4Week 12
Baricitiniba10 mg QDNANANANAAcitretin30 mg QDNANANANACiclosporin2.5-5 mg/kg/dNANANANAValues presented are mean (90% confidence intervals) and were generated assuming a typical weight of 90 kg.aInvestigational. bDiscontinued. All other drugs are approved. cAlefacept data only reported up to 24 weeks; ET90 is estimated to occur sometime beyond the time periodfor which there were reported data. BID, twice daily; BIW, twice weekly; CD2, T lymphocyte; ET50, time to reach 50% of the maximal treatment effect; ET90, time to reach90% of the maximal treatment effect; IL, interleukin; JAK, Janus kinase; NA, not available; PASI75,  75% reduction from baseline Psoriasis Area and Severity Index score;PDE4, phosphodiesterase 4; QD, once daily; QM, once monthly; QW, once weekly; Q2W, once every 2 weeks; Q4W, once every 4 weeks; Q8W, once every 8 weeks; Q12W,once every 12 weeks; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
ARTICLESresponse relationship for the model-predicted PASI responseoverlaid with the observed data for each drug is presented inFigure 3.The model-predicted PASI responses for a typical patient foreach drug are summarized in Table 2. There was close agreementbetween the estimates from the longitudinal model and the land-mark model, although the confidence intervals were generallywider for the values generated from the longitudinal model.The effect of body weight on PASI response was also tested inthe landmark model on placebo effect and/or drug effect terms.There was no significant improvement in the model fit whenthe weight effect was applied to any of the drug effect terms(Emax, ED50), while it was significant for the placebo effect term.Therefore, the presented predictions are based on a model in whichbody weight was retained for the placebo effect term alone.Although the effect was small, weight was shown to have a statisti-cally significant negative effect on the placebo response (i.e., heavierpatients showed a lesser response compared with lighter patients).Among injectable/infusible agents, IL-17 inhibitors were themost efficacious, with ixekizumab (80 mg) demonstrating thehighest placebo-adjusted response rate (88.2% [86.8, 89.5] and71.7% [69.1, 74.6] for PASI75 and PASI90, respectively) atWeek 12. Within the oral systemic treatments, tofacitinib 10 mgb.i.d. and cyclosporine 5 mg/kg/d had comparable response ratesARTICLES
of 53.8% (47.0, 58.7) and 46.7% (36.9, 56.5) for PASI75 and27.5% (22.1, 31.8) and 22.1% (16.0, 29.6) for PASI90, respec-tively. Acitretin 30 mg q.d. and apremilast 30 mg b.i.d. showedthe lowest efficacy among the oral systemic agents (25.0% [16.1,36.7] and 26.8% [23.2, 31.8] for PASI75, and 9.57% [5.55, 15.7]and 10.3% [8.52, 12.8] for PASI90, respectively).External validation (predicting longitudinal PASI90)The final longitudinal model, developed from the time-coursePASI75 dataset (test dataset), was used to predict the time-courseof PASI90 response (validation dataset). When scaling factorsobtained from the landmark model were incorporated into thelongitudinal model, predictions of PASI response were consistentwith the observed data, with the majority of reported PASI90responses falling within the 90% prediction interval (Figure 5).The central tendency of predicted PASI90 response appeared tobe slightly underestimated with brodalumab; however, all otherdrugs were within the range of longitudinal prediction curves.Based on Figure 2 and Figure 3, both models independentlyshowed good agreement between the observed and predicted dataDrugClinical doseLandmark model-predicted PASIresponders (%)Landmark model-predicted differencefrom placebo (%)TNF-a inhibitorIL-17 inhibitorIL-12/23 inhibitorDihydrofolate reductase inhibitorJAK inhibitorVitamin A analogCD2 antagonistPDE4 inhibitorCalcineurin inhibitorValues presented are mean (90% confidence intervals) and were generated assuming a typical weight of 90 kg.aInvestigational. bDiscontinued. All other drugs are approved. BID, twice daily; BIW, twice weekly; CD2, T lymphocyte; IL, interleukin; JAK, Janus kinase; PASI75/90,  75%or  90% reduction from baseline Psoriasis Area and Severity Index score; PDE4, phosphodiesterase 4; QD, once daily; QM, once monthly; QW, once weekly; Q2W, onceevery 2 weeks; Q4W, once every 4 weeks; Q8W, once every 8 weeks; Q12W, once every 12 weeks; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.ARTICLES
for these compounds, confirming that the models were reason-ably describing the data.DISCUSSIONAggregate level landmark and longitudinal models were used toevaluate the dose-response (magnitude) and time-course (onsetof drug effect) of PASI response in patients receiving systemicagents for the treatment of moderate to severe psoriasis. Bothmodels adequately described the data, suggesting that the dose-response relationships are well-captured using sigmoidal Emaxfunction structures, and that the maximum drug effect isachieved within 12 weeks across most of the drugs included inthis analysis. Moreover, both models suggest that drugs with thesame mechanism of action demonstrate a consistent dose-response.One of the benefits of the longitudinal model is that it enablesthe comparison of the rate of onset among drugs. In this analysis,ET50 was estimated from the predicted time-course of PASI75
responses. Generally, drugs with the highest efficacy had the fast-est onset of action. For example, the highest efficacy was observedwith the IL-17 inhibitors ixekizumab and brodalumab (PASI75response 80%) at the primary evaluation timepoint (12 weeks),with ET50 of 3.7 and 3.9 weeks, respectively. In comparison, thelowest efficacy was observed for alefacept (PASI75 response 16%)with an ET50 of 11 weeks. The average ET50 across all drugs inthis analysis was 6.5 weeks. Understanding differences in ET50allows studies to be modified to provide an appropriate time-frame to compare drug efficacy. Early assessments (after 4-6weeks of treatment) may be sufficient for drugs with shorterET50 and highly efficacious drugs (e.g., ixekizumab and brodalu-mab), whereas a longer sampling duration may be required toallow patients to achieve maximum benefit for drugs with longerET50 (e.g., etanercept, methotrexate, or apremilast).The relationship between body weight and PASI responsewas of clinical interest, and an inverse relationship was detectedin this meta-analysis. In both longitudinal and landmark analy-ses, body weight was identified as exhibiting an inverse effect onARTICLES
the placebo component of the model, suggesting that bodyweight affects the overall PASI response regardless of drug. Thebody weight effect was also significant on the temporal compo-nent of drug effect (kdrug) in the longitudinal model. These datasuggest that heavier patients tend to achieve lower efficacy andmay also experience slower onset of effect compared with lighterpatients. The significance of the weight effect on the placebocomponents of the models should not be interpreted in a mech-anistic context, as the models were developed based on summarylevel, and not patient level, data. The important finding wasthat, despite this attribution, body weight demonstrated aneffect on the absolute difference in the percentage of respondersbetween active and control groups. Therefore, increasing drugdose may be particularly beneficial for heavier patients if theyfail to show a meaningful clinical response at lower doses. Sucha decision to escalate the dose in heavier patients can beachieved by evaluating the dose-response characteristics of eachdrug and assessing the location of the clinical dose relative tothe drug's ED50.However, caution is required in interpreting covariate effectswith aggregate-level data. In general, meta-analyses using datafrom the literature report covariates (age, body weight, sex, race,etc.) as summary statistics (mean or median % of the trial data-set), which results in reduced power to detect clinically relevantinteractions. In an analysis conducted by Lambert et al.,6 it wasdemonstrated that even moderately strong interactions may notbe adequately detected in the meta-analytic setting. Furthermore,there is also a risk that introduction of aggregate-level covariatesmay result in underestimation of exposure-response effects.7
Therefore, although both meta-analytic models reported heresuggested that increasing body weight has an inverse effect onPASI response, the true magnitude of this interaction may nothave been captured in this setting. Instead, the use of individuallevel data may provide better estimates of the magnitude of thiseffect and may enhance the understanding of this relationship ona mechanistic level.As with any meta-analysis, the utility of the results depends, inpart, on the studies that provided the information for analysis.We therefore investigated heterogeneity in the aggregated pooleddataset. During study selection, only predefined inclusion andexclusion criteria were applied to control for possible heterogene-ity across the pooled studies. The parameterization of theARTICLES
landmark model therefore incorporated a study-specific placeboeffect (E0) for each trial. In this manner, study-related differenceswere accounted for by allowing the placebo effect of the PASIresponse to shift across different studies. In contrast, the drugeffect was assumed to be constant across studies, i.e., all of the dif-ferences in response for a given drug at a given dose were assumedto be related to differences between studies and not to the drugitself.When predicted placebo effects (E0) from the landmark modelwere plotted for each study (N 5 71), they were shown to be nor-mally distributed around a single value (data not shown). How-ever, the I2 statistic8 of placebo effects (which describes thepercentage of variance that is related to between-study differ-ences) was estimated to be 82%, suggesting that the parameteriza-tion for study-specific placebo effect in the landmark model mayhave helped to adequately control for any potential study-relatedheterogeneity in the dataset. A similar approach (estimatingstudy-specific placebo effects) was also attempted in the longitu-dinal model, but the results were inconclusive due to overparame-terization. Instead, a placebo component was modeled as apopulation mean response with between-study variability as arandom effect. The estimated random effects in the longitudinalmodel were nearly normally distributed, suggesting that the parsi-moniousmodel(withoutestimatingstudy-specificplaceboeffects) is a reasonable alternative to describe the data.Due to the advancement of antipsoriatic therapies, PASI90may eventually replace PASI75 as the key indicator of efficacy ininvestigational trials.9 New psoriasis therapies with targetedmechanisms (e.g., secukinumab, ixekizumab, and brodalumab)have shown much higher levels of improvement in clinical stud-ies, and therefore the emphasis from clinicians, regulators, anddrug developers is shifting to higher threshold endpoints, such asPASI90. The external validation of predicted PASI90 response inthe longitudinal setting shows high agreement with the scalabilityemployed in the landmark setting, and both PASI75 and PASI90results tended to plateau at 12 weeks. This suggests that a sim-ple scaling factor can be used to link PASI75 and responses, espe-cially in the period following attainment of Emax. It is worthnoting that the external validation was performed by bridging themodels, i.e., the longitudinal model for PASI75 was used to pre-dict PASI90 by incorporating the estimated relationship betweenPASI75 and PASI90 from the landmark model. This represents amuch higher hurdle for model validation than applying the samemodel on a different dataset.The magnitude of treatment effects for systemic agents wasvisualized with predicted PASI responses. Consistent with previ-ous reports,10 IL-17 inhibitors appeared to be the most effica-cious injectable/infusible psoriasis treatments, followed by otherclasses of drugs. Infliximab (5 mg/kg) and ixekizumab (80 mg)had the highest responses among TNF-a inhibitors and IL-17inhibitors, respectively. Among the oral agents, tofacitinib 10 mgb.i.d. and cyclosporine 5 mg/kg/d appeared to have comparableefficacy, which was higher than other approved or investigationalsystemic oral treatments. Acitretin 30 mg q.d. and apremilast30 mg b.i.d. showed the lowest efficacy among the oral systemictreatments.
In summary, two mathematical models were developed todescribe the time-course and dose-response from the data acrossall systemic treatments for patients with psoriasis. The simulationresults also suggest that the model could be useful to predict thetime-course of other PASI subscales such as PASI90. These mod-els provide a quantitative framework to understand the currenttreatment options and a potential use of models in drug develop-ment, either alone or bridging together, to predict the time-course for endpoints of interest with investigational drugs.METHODSDatabase developmentThe data for the analysis originated from two sources: data from the lit-erature for approved and investigational psoriasis treatments from 1998through 2015, and summary level data for tofacitinib phase II and IIIclinical studies. Although the results from tofacitinib clinical studies arepublished, the corresponding summary data for this analysis wereobtained from a Pfizer internal database to maintain numerical accuracy.
Literature search and data selection. Following the search and selec-tion strategy proposed by the Cochrane group,11 the Ovid Medline searchengine, US-based and European regulatory documents such as SummaryBasis of Approvals and European Public Assessment Reports weresearched from 1964 to 2015 for reports of PASI responders in clinical tri-als for the pharmaceutical treatment of psoriasis. The search strategyfocused on moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, randomized placebo- oractive-controlled trials of IL-12/23 inhibitors, TNF-a inhibitors, IL-17inhibitors, CD2 antagonists, PDE4 inhibitors, JAK inhibitors, and tradi-tional oral agents. The primary efficacy endpoint PASI75 and other PASIscores (PASI50, PASI90, and PASI100) were captured in the database.Abstracts of potential records were screened by qualified personnel todetermine the relevance to the research objectives; the study designs, treat-ment regimens, and patient populations were scrutinized to ensure that allstudies represented data that supported pooling. PASI response data thatpassed the screening process were extracted from published articles, rele-vant conference posters, and/or abstracts. The data from selected sourceswere captured or digitized, then data curation (e.g., unit standardization,normalization of different dose regimen) was performed.Although a single database was generated to support both the longitu-dinal and landmark analysis, three separate datasets were created asrequired by the modeling objectives. In the longitudinal analysis, allrepeated measures of PASI75 response (test dataset) were used for modelbuilding, and all repeated measures of PASI90 response (validation data-set) were used for the external validation. The third dataset was for thelandmark analysis; PASI responses (PASI50, 75, 90, 100) at the primaryefficacy measurement time (majority of studies were 12 weeks; range,10-24 weeks) were included.
Model developmentLongitudinal model. The longitudinal model structure consisted of pla-cebo and drug effects that were exponential vs, time describing the longi-tudinal aspect of the effect. The response value was transformed into thelogit scale to restrict the estimated probability values between 0 and 1 asshown in the following equations:PrdPASI75Th5gff01fdrugg(1)12e2kpbotimeexpdhTh(3)ARTICLES
fdrug5 Emaxdrug  d12e2kdrugtimeTh  DosegDoseg1EDg50;drug(4)where Pr is the probability, g is the inverse logit function to transformthe treatment effect, which is the sum of placebo (f0) and drug effect(fdrug) to the probability scale. The parameter kpbo and kdrug are rate con-stants describing onset of placebo and drug effects, respectively, with amodeled unique estimate for each drug.The dose-response component of the model was described by a sig-moidal Emax function. The model estimated the parameters for A (inter-cept), B (asymptote on placebo model), E (asymptote on drug model),ED50 (dose achieving 50% of maximal response), for each drug. The nor-malized dose by the regulatory approved dose regimen, or normalizeddose by the most frequently reported dose regimen (for nonapproveddrugs) was used to account for different doses or unique titrationschemes for each drug during clinical studies. The Hill coefficient (c)was also tested in the model. However, the parameter(s) were not esti-mated for rate constant or dose-response terms if there was not suffi-cient longitudinal or dose-response information available for a certaindrug. The between-study variability was described by g, having a normalprobability distribution with mean 0 and variance x2.Landmark model. A joint analysis of the efficacy endpoints (PASI50,75, 90, and 100) was performed to estimate differences in relative effectfor each endpoint by treatment. The response variable was the percent-age of patients achieving PASI50, 75, 90, and 100 at each trial endpoint,typically 12 weeks postfirst-dose administration.The structure for the joint meta-regression model of PASI50,PASI75, PASI90, and PASI100 responses is summarized in Equations 5through 8. The final model was structured as follows:
PdeventThijk5gfEoi1Edrug1hi;kg(5)where PdeventThijk represents the probability (%) of a patient having anevent for the kth endpoint in the jth treatment arm of the ith trial and gwas the inverse logit function to transform the treatment effect to theprobability scale.Eoi captures the estimated placebo response in PASI75 scores for apatient with body weight 90 kg (approximate median of the dataset) inthe ith trial as defined in Equation 6. A different placebo response wasestimated for every trial with a constant fixed shift between PASIlevels.where triali is a baseline placebo effect for the ith trial; I1, I2 and I3 arecoefficients for PASI50, PASI90, or PASI100 relative to PASI75scores.Edrug represents the drug-response with drug-specific model parame-ters, such as maximum response for each drug (emd) and an effectivedose for each individual drug (ED50,d). For the traditional oral systemictreatments (methotrexate, cyclosporine, and acitretin), the optimal PASIresponses were achieved in practice by flexible dose adjustment for eachpatient, based on safety and efficacy. Therefore, there were insufficientdata in the literature to fully describe the dose-response relationship forthese drugs. As such, the maximum responses for traditional oral sys-temic agents were modeled as single-step offsets (Equation 7).For TNF-a inhibitor, IL-12/23 inhibitor, IL-17 inhibitor, CD2antagonist, PDE4 inhibitor, and JAK inhibitor, a sigmoidal Emax func-tion was used to describe the relationship between dose and PASIresponse for each drug (Equation 7). As with E0, a scaling factor wasapplied to the estimated Emax to account for differences in PASI75,PASI50, PASI90, and PASI100 scores (Equation 8).If drug is traditional systemic agent : em5emd;
All other drugs : em5emd  DOSEgddexpdED50;dThgd1DOSEgddIn the above equations, emd represented the drug-specific maximumeffect; cd was the Hill coefficient; ED50,d was the estimated dose of halfof the maximum effect and I5, I6, and I7 were scaling factors applied toPASI50, PASI90, and PASI100 scores, respectively. In this analysis, a sin-gle Hill coefficient was applied to all drug classes except for IL-17 inhibi-tors. The dose-response curve for IL-17 inhibitors was sufficientlydifferent from other drugs of interest that an individual offset wasrequired to more appropriately describe the dose-response relationship.The random effect gi,k on overall drug response (E0 1 Edrug) was definedas having a mean 0 and variance x2k. The model included terms to accountfor the correlation between different PASI scores (i.e., PASI50, PASI75,PASI90, or PASI100) within the same study and to account for the correla-tion between PASI scores among different arms within the same study.Covariate model. Based on previous knowledge,12,13 body weight wasan important determinant of efficacy in patients with psoriasis. There-fore, body weight was tested as a covariate in the longitudinal model andin the landmark model if body weight data were available in the litera-ture (aggregated level, either by study arm or stratified by body weight),as described in Equations 9 and 10, respectively:WTeffect5 WEIG90
u(9)WTeffect5dWEIG290Th  I4(10)If body weight data were not reported (10-15% of studies in the liter-ature), WEIG was set to 90 so that there was no influence on thecovariate estimation. The weight effect was tested on the treatmenteffect of the drug (Emax, ED50, or kdrug), as well as on the placeboeffect (E0).Residual error model. In both the longitudinal and landmark analyses,the predicted PASI responses represented the probability of 50,  75, 90, or 100% improvement in PASI scores. The residual error compo-nent (E) had a normal probability distribution with mean 0 and variancer2. Weight based on standard errors of fitted values (see Equations 11and 12) was noted as W, and the number of subjects for each armwithin each study to account for the effect on parameter estimation dueto the size of each trial was noted as N. Because studies were weightedby inverse of standard errors, larger studies had more influence on esti-mating the parameter means.ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiPrd12PrThNrAdditionally, due to the longitudinal nature of the data and correlationwithin timepoint measurements of the same group of patients,14 a thirdlevel of variability (with mean 0 and variance r2CORR) was also incorpo-rated into the longitudinal model as shown below:PASI755PrdPASI75Th1W  de1ecorrTh(13)
ARTICLESThe standard model diagnostics (e.g., goodness-of-fit plots, precisionsof the parameter estimates) were performed for both models to assess themodel adequacy and any residual error model misspecifications.Simulations. Simulations were performed using the final model param-eter estimates. The results were overlaid with observed data for bothtime course (longitudinal) and dose-response at 12 weeks (landmark)data by drug (and by dose) to visually compare the results and confirmthe model performance. Predicted PASI75 responses generated from thelongitudinal model were compared to predicted PASI75 responses fromthe landmark model to demonstrate consistency between the models.ET50 and ET90 (the time to reach 50% and 90% of the maximal treat-ment effect) were also calculated from the longitudinal model.The final landmark model was used to simulate PASI75 or PASI90responses at Week 12 for a typical patient with moderate to severe psoria-sis for each drug at clinically recommended doses. Placebo-adjusted treat-ment effect (effect size) for each drug was summarized in a forest plot.External validation. External validation was performed for PASI90time-course response (using the validation dataset), in which the finalmodel for longitudinal PASI75 was used to simulate (N 5 1,000) thePASI90 time-course by incorporating the scaling factor between PASI75and PASI90 obtained from the landmark model, then overlaid with theobserved PASI90 time-course data.
Modeling software. Longitudinal data analyses were conducted usingNonlinear Mixed Effect Modeling software NONMEM (v. 7.3) using thefirst-order conditional expectation method. A nonlinear mixed-effects rou-tine in S-PLUS 8.0.4 for Windows (Insightful, Seattle, WA) was used forthe landmark analysis. The input datasets and model outputs were manip-ulated and all graphical displays were generated using R (v. 3.0.2) andRstudio (v. 0.99.879). Bootstrap was performed using PsN (v. 3.5.4).Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version ofthis article.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe first two authors contributed equally to this work. This study wassponsored by Pfizer Inc. Editorial support, under direction from theauthors, was provided by Alice MacLachlan, PhD, of Complete MedicalCommunications, and funded by Pfizer Inc.CONFLICTS OF INTERESTK.I, S.A., P.G, R.W, H.V., H.T., S.K., and A.T. are employees andshareholders of Pfizer Inc. T.C., and M.K. were employees of Pfizer Inc atthe time of the analysis. J.M. has acted as a consultant for Pfizer Inc.L.P. has received consultancy/speaker's honoraria from AbbVie,Almirall, Amgen, Biogen, Boehringer, Celgene, Gebro, Janssen, Leo-Pharma, Lilly, Merck-Serono, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer Inc, and Sandoz. L.P.has participated in a company-sponsored speaker's bureau for Celgene,Janssen, MSD, Novartis, and Pfizer Inc.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSK.I., T.C., S.A., P.G., J.W.M., L.P., R.W., H.V., H.T., S.K., A.T., and M.K.wrote the article; K.I., T.C., S.A., P.G., J.W.M., R.W., H.V., H.T., S.K.,A.T., and M.K. designed the research; K.I., T.C., and S.A. analyzed thedata.VC 2017 The Authors Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics published byWiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacol-ogy and TherapeuticsThis is an open access article under the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution andreproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited andis not used for commercial purposes.
1.SchEURoN, M.P. & Boehncke, W.H. Psoriasis. N. Engl. J. Med. 352,1899-1912 (2005).2.Menter, A. et al. Guidelines of care for the management of psoriasisand psoriatic arthritis: Section 6. Guidelines of care for the treatmentof psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: case-based presentations andevidence-based conclusions. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 65, 137-174(2011).3.Papp, K.A. et al. Tofacitinib, an oral Janus kinase inhibitor, for thetreatment of chronic plaque psoriasis: results from two, randomized,placebo-controlled, phase iii trials. Br. J. Dermatol. 173, 949-961(2015).4.Bachelez, H. et al. Tofacitinib versus etanercept orplacebo inmoderate-to-severe chronic plaque psoriasis: a phase 3 randomisednon-inferiority trial. Lancet 386, 552-561 (2015).5.Bissonnette, R. et al. Tofacitinib withdrawal and retreatment inmoderate-to-severe chronic plaque psoriasis: a randomizedcontrolled trial. Br. J. Dermatol. 172, 1395-1406 (2015).6.Lambert, P.C., Sutton, A.J., Abrams, K.R. & Jones, D.R. A comparisonof summary patient-level covariates in meta-regression with individualpatient data meta-analysis. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 55, 86-94 (2002).7.Abrahamowicz, M. et al. Bias due to aggregation of individualcovariates in the cox regression model. Am. J. Epidemiol. 160, 696-706 (2004).8.Higgins, J.P. & Thompson, S.G. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. Stat. Med. 21, 1539-1558 (2002).9.Torres, T. & Puig, L. Treatment goals for psoriasis: should PASI 90become the standard of care? Actas Dermosifiliogr. 106, 155-157(2015).10. Puig, L., LoPez, A., Vilarrasa, E. & GarciA, I. Efficacy of biologics in thetreatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis: a systematicreview and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials withdifferent timepoints. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 28, 1633-1653 (2014).11. O'Conner, D., Green, S. & Higgins, J.P.T. Defining the review questionand developing criteria for including studies. In: Cochrane Handbookfor Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0 (eds. Higgins,J.P.T. & Green, S.) (2011).12. Gupta, P. et al. A model-based meta-analysis for dose responsecomparison of psoriasis treatments. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 72, Suppl1, (2015).13. Mandema, J. et al. Evaluation of the impact of body weight on theefficacy of biologic therapies for the treatment of psoriasis: a dose-response meta-analysis. Abstract presented at the Psoriasis 2013 -4Th International Congress On Psoriasis (2013).14. Ahn, J.E. & French, J.L. Longitudinal aggregate data model-basedmeta-analysis with NONMEM: approaches to handling withintreatment arm correlation. J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn. 37, 179-201 (2010).
ARTICLES
