  CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................26Analysis 1.5. Comparison 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA), Outcome 5 Juniper AQLQscore (change from baseline)...............................................................................................................................................................
Analysis 2.2. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 2 Asthma control(short asthma morbidity score), change from baseline.....................................................................................................................Analysis 2.3. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 3 Asthma control(Asthma Severity Questionnaire).........................................................................................................................................................Analysis 2.4. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 4 All-cause SAEs......43Analysis 2.5. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 5 EuroQoL score(change from baseline).........................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 2.6. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 6 St. George'sRespiratory Scale score (change from baseline).................................................................................................................................Analysis 2.7. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 7 Lung function,PEFR morning (L/min) (change from baseline)...................................................................................................................................CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 2.8. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 8 Lung function,reduction in FEV1 (% predicted, change from baseline)....................................................................................................................Analysis 2.10. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 10 Exacerbationrequiring ED visit...................................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 2.11. Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 11 Mortality.........44CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................47DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................47SOURCES OF SUPPORT...............................................................................................................................................................................47DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................47Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults withasthmaIain Crossingham1, David JW Evans2, Nathan R Halcovitch3, Paul A Marsden4
1East Lancashire Hospitals NHS Trust, Blackburn, UK. 2Lancaster Health Hub, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 3Department ofChemistry, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 4Lancashire Chest Centre, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, RoyalPreston Hospital, Preston, UKContact address: David JW Evans, Lancaster Health Hub, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YG, UK. Editorial group: Cochrane Airways Group.Publication status and date: New, published in Issue 2, 2017.Citation:  Crossingham I, Evans DJW, Halcovitch NR, Marsden PA. Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults withasthma. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD011802. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011802.pub2.Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TAsthma is a condition of the airways afecting more than 300 million adults and children worldwide. National and international guidelinesrecommend titrating up the dose of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) to gain symptom control at the lowest possible dose because long-termuse of higher doses of ICS carries a risk of systemic adverse events. For patients whose asthma symptoms are controlled on moderate orhigher doses of ICS, it may be possible to reduce the dose of ICS without compromising symptom control.Objectives
To evaluate the evidence for stepping down ICS treatment in adults with well-controlled asthma who are already receiving a moderate orhigh dose of ICS.We identified trials from the Specialised Register of the Cochrane Airways Group and conducted a search of ClinicalTrials.gov(www.ClinicalTrials.gov) and the World Health Organization (WHO) trials portal (www.who.int/ictrp/en/). We searched all databases fromtheir inception with no restriction on language. We also searched the reference lists of included studies and relevant reviews. We performedthe most recent search in July 2016.Selection criteriaWe included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of at least 12 weeks' duration and excluded cross-over trials. We looked for studies ofadults (aged >= 18 years) whose asthma had been well controlled for a minimum of three months on at least a moderate dose of ICS. Weexcluded studies that enrolled participants with any other respiratory comorbidity.
We included trials comparing a reduction in the dose of ICS versus no change in the dose of ICS in people with well-controlled asthma whoa) were not taking a concomitant long-acting beta agonist (LABA; comparison 1), and b) were taking a concomitant LABA (comparison 2).Two review authors independently screened the search results for included studies, extracted data on prespecified outcomes of interestand assessed the risk of bias of included studies; we resolved disagreements by discussion with a third review author. We analyseddichotomous data as odds ratios (ORs) using study participants as the unit of analysis and analysed continuous data as mean diferences(MDs). We used a random-efects model. We rated all outcomes using the GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Developmentand Evaluation) system and presented results in 'Summary of findings' tables.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMain results
We included six studies, which randomised a total of 1654 participants (ICS dose reduction, no concomitant LABA (comparison 1): n = 892participants, three RCTs; ICS dose reduction, concomitant LABA (comparison 2): n = 762 participants, three RCTs). All included studies wereRCTs with a parallel design that compared a fixed dose of ICS versus a 50% to 60% reduction in the dose of ICS in adult participants withwell-controlled asthma. The duration of the treatment period ranged from 12 to 52 weeks (mean duration 21 weeks; median duration 14weeks). Two studies were performed in the setting of primary care, two were performed in the secondary care setting and two reportedno information on setting.Meta-analysis was hampered by the small number of studies contributing to each comparison, combined with heterogeneity amongoutcomes reported in the included studies. We found the quality of synthesised evidence to be low or very low for most outcomesconsidered because of a risk of bias (principally, selective reporting), imprecision and indirectness. Although we found no statisticallysignificant or clinically relevant diferences between groups with respect to any of the primary or secondary outcomes considered in thisreview, the data were insuficient to rule out benefit or harm.Authors' conclusionsThe strength of the evidence is not suficient to determine whether stepping down the dose of ICS is of net benefit (in terms of fewer adverseefects) or harm (in terms of reduced efectiveness of treatment) for adult patients with well-controlled asthma. A small number of relevantstudies and varied outcome measures limited the number of meta-analyses that we could perform. Additional well-designed RCTs of longerduration are needed to inform clinical practice regarding use of a 'stepping down ICS' strategy for patients with well-controlled asthma.
P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YBackgroundAsthma is a condition of the airways afecting more than 300 million adults and children worldwide. National and international guidelinesrecommend increasing the dose of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in steps to gain control of symptoms at the lowest possible dose becauselong-term use of higher doses of ICS carries a risk of side efects. For patients whose asthma symptoms are controlled on moderate orhigher doses of ICS, it may be possible to reduce the dose of ICS (step down) without losing control of asthma symptoms.Review question
We searched for studies (minimum length 12 weeks) in people with well-controlled asthma that compared the efect of reducing the doseof ICS versus maintaining the dose of ICS. Studies had to include adults aged 18 years or older whose asthma was well controlled on amedium dose of ICS for a minimum of three months. We were also interested in determining whether taking another type of inhaled asthmamedication (long-acting beta agonists - LABAs) would influence the results. Two review authors screened the search results independentlyof each other and determined which studies were relevant for inclusion in this review. The relevant information from these studies wasalso added to this review by two review authors independently.We found six studies that were relevant to our review. Overall, we found no diferences between groups (reduced ICS dose vs maintainedICS dose) in terms of asthma attacks, asthma control, quality of life or side efects. Taking or not taking LABA at the same time did notappear to afect the results. However, we assessed the quality of the evidence as low or very low because of the low number of studiesfound and problems with how the studies were reported. This means that we cannot be certain of our findings; additional studies areneeded to explore this topic.ConclusionsIn conclusion, current evidence is not good enough to show whether patients can reduce their ICS dose without losing control of theirasthma. It is also not clear whether stepping down the dose of ICS would reduce the occurrence of side efects. Additional studies areneeded to answer this question.
Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings for the main comparison.   ICS dose reduction compared with no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA) for adults withasthmaICS dose reduction compared with no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA) for adults with asthmaPatient or population: adults with asthmaSetting: primary care and specialist centresIntervention: ICS dose reductionComparison: no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA)Anticipated absolute effects* (95% CI)OutcomesRisk with no changein ICS dose (no con-comitant LABA)Exacerbation requiring OCSFollow-up: range 10 weeks to12 weeksVery lowaAsthma controlassessed by: Asthma Symp-tom Scale from: 0 (no symp-toms) to 5 (severe symptoms)Follow-up: 10 weeksMean asthma con-trol score in the nochange in ICS dosegroup was 1.79.MD 0.22 lower(1.05 lower to0.61 higher)All-cause SAEsFollow-up: mean 12 weeksLowcNo clear benefit or harm of steppingdown the dose of ICS (low-quality ev-idence)
Steroid-related AEsFollow-up: range 10 weeks to12 weeksVery lowdNo clear benefit or harm of steppingdown the dose of ICS (very low-qual-ity evidence)Health-related quality of life(change from baseline)assessed by: AQLQFollow-up: 12 weeksMean change frombaseline in health-re-lated quality of lifefor the no change inICS dose group was0.02.MD 0.21 lower(0.33 lower to0.09 lower)  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Lung function, FEV1 (L)assessed by: spirometryFollow-up: range 10 weeks to12 weeksMean FEV1 in the nochange in ICS dosegroup was 3.15 litres.MD 0.02 litreslower(0.12 lower to0.08 higher)LowfNo clear benefit or harm of steppingdown the dose of ICS (low-quality ev-idence)Exacerbations requiring hos-pitalisation - not reported
-----Outcome not reported by includedstudies*Risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95%CI).aThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for indirectness (included studies were performed at specialist centres) and twice for imprecision (no events reportedby Magnussen 2000; confidence intervals include null effect and appreciable benefit or harm).dThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for risk of bias (selective reporting), once for indirectness (representative of specialist centres) and once for imprecision(confidence intervals include null effect and appreciable benefit or harm).eThe quality of the evidence was downgraded twice for risk of bias (selective reporting and lack of blinding (subjective outcome)) and once for indirectness (single studyrepresentative of one setting and drug regimen).GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High quality: We are very confident that the true effect lies close to the estimate of effect.Moderate quality: We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of effect but may be substantially different.Low quality: Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of effect.Very low quality: We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.ICS dose reduction compared with no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA) for adults with asthmaPatient or population: adults with asthmaSetting: primary and secondary careCochrane
LibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Intervention: ICS dose reductionComparison: no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA)Anticipated absolute effects*(95% CI)Risk with nochange in ICSdose (concomi-tant LABA)Risk with ICSdose reductionRelative effect(95% CI)Number of par-ticipants(studies)Quality of theevidence(GRADE)CommentsExacerbation requiring OCSFollow-up: range 4 months to12 monthsNo clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to exacerba-tions requiring OCS (low-quality evidence)Asthma control (short asthmamorbidity score)Follow-up: 12 monthsMean asthmacontrol scorewas 1.43.MD 0.16 higher(0.34 lower to0.66 higher)LowbNo clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to asthmacontrol (low-quality evidence)All-cause SAEsFollow-up: range 4 months to12 monthsLowaNo clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to all-causeSAEs (low-quality evidence)Steroid-related AEs - not re-ported----- St. George's Respiratory Scalescore (change from baseline)Follow-up: 12 monthsScore 0-100. 100 = greatestimpact of chest disease onlife; MCID is 4 units.Mean changefrom baselinein HRQoL scorewas 7.4.cMD 0.13 higher(2.8 lower to3.06 higher)Lowb
No clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to HRQoL(low-quality evidence)Exacerbation requiring hospi-talisationFollow-up: range 4 months to12 monthsLowdNo clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to exacerba-tions requiring hospitalisation (low-quali-ty evidence)Lung function, reduction inFEV1 (% predicted, changefrom baseline)Follow-up: 3 monthsMean changefrom baselinein % predict-ed FEV1 was-0.75%.MD 2.45 lower(8.88 lower to3.98 higher)-14(1 RCT)Very loweNo clear benefit or harm of stepping downthe dose of ICS with respect to lung func-tion (very low-quality evidence)CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.*Risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95%CI).aThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for risk of bias (selective reporting) and once for imprecision (confidence intervals include null effect and appreciablebenefit or harm).bThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for risk of bias (selective reporting) and once for indirectness (single study representative of one setting and drug regi-men).cNote that study authors reported the change to the lowest SGRQ score during follow-up.dThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for risk of bias (selective reporting) and once for imprecision (confidence intervals include null effect and appreciablebenefit or harm).eThe quality of the evidence was downgraded once for risk of bias (selective reporting), once for indirectness (single study representative of one setting or drug regimen)and once for imprecision (wide CI).AE, adverse event; CI, confidence interval; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in one second; GRADE, Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluation;HRQoL, health-related quality of life; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, long-acting beta agonist; MCID, minimum clinically important difference; MD, mean difference; OCS,oral corticosteroid; OR, odds ratio; RCT, randomised controlled trial; RR, risk ratio; SAE, serious adverse event.
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High quality: We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effectModerate quality: We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is sub-stantially differentLow quality: Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effectVery low quality: We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsB A C K G R O U N DDescription of the conditionAsthma is a condition of the airways afecting adults and children.The number of diagnoses worldwide is estimated at more than 300million (Global Asthma Network 2014; Partridge 2006). During anasthma attack (exacerbation), narrowing of the airways and excessmucus production occurs, causing symptoms of chest tightness,wheezing and breathlessness. Lung function tests typically showairflow obstruction with a low peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR),low forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and a low FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio (SIGN/BTS 2016). Lung functionabnormalities improve and function may return to normal withtreatment. Variability in measures of airflow is the hallmark ofasthma.Exacerbations of asthma can be triggered by environmentalstimuli. In immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated asthma (whichmay account for half of asthma cases) (Pearce 1999), indoorinhaled allergens such as house dust mite, cat and dog areofen implicated (Custovic 2012). Other recognised environmentalstimuli include air pollutants such as ozone and fine particulates,active and passive exposure to tobacco smoke (Xepapadaki2009), industrial chemicals such as phthalates (Jaakkola 2008),isocyanates (Fisseler-Eckhof 2011), viral infections and cold air.
Description of the interventionAcute episodes of asthma are treated with reliever therapy, usuallya short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA). Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)are used widely as first-line therapy for patients with asthma thatis uncontrolled on reliever therapy alone (SIGN/BTS 2016). Inhaledcorticosteroids, which efectively relieve symptoms and preventasthma exacerbations (Adams 2005; Adams 2008), are preferableto treatment by the oral route, as they lead to lower systemicabsorption and fewer side efects. However, economic and socialfactors may contribute to non-compliance with inhaler-basedtherapies in some low- and middle-income countries (GINA 2016). Avariety of devices are available for delivery of ICS at difering dosesand particle sizes. Generally, ICS are taken twice daily, althoughsome newer preparations are taken once daily. For patients withpersistent asthma, ICS are ofen taken alongside a long-actingbeta2 agonist (LABA), sometimes via a combination inhaler. ICSshould be commenced at a dose appropriate to disease severityand control. National and international guidelines recommendtitrating up the dose of ICS to gain symptom control at the lowestpossible dose. Long-term use of higher doses of ICS carries risk ofsystemic adverse events (i.e. side efects caused by the action ofthe steroid at sites other than the intended target - the airways)(Lipworth 1999); however, lower doses of up to 800 mcg per dayof beclomethasone dipropionate are considered tolerable (SIGN/BTS 2016). For patients whose asthma symptoms are controlledon moderate or higher doses of ICS, it may be possible to reducethe dose of ICS without compromising symptom control (Hawkins2003).How the intervention might workICS ofer efective treatment for asthma owing to their anti-inflammatory and decongestive efects on bronchial airways (Tse1984). LABA function by decreasing bronchial hyperreactivity tophysical and chemical stimuli and by relaxing bronchial smooth
muscle (Lipworth 1992). Guidelines for asthma treatment focuson achieving, then maintaining, control while balancing the risksassociated with long-term medication (Bateman 2008). Onceasthma control is achieved (e.g. as per GINA 2016 criteria),guidelines recommend 'stepping down' treatment to the lowestpossible dose of ICS (SIGN/BTS 2016). These recommendations arebased on known risks of systemic adverse efects (e.g. loss of bonedensity in adults, growth retardation in children) associated withlong-term use of high-dose ICS (Colice 2006; Lipworth 1999; SIGN/BTS 2016).Why it is important to do this reviewPatients with persistent asthma are generally treated with a highdose of ICS or with a combination of ICS and LABA (Ducharme2010). Two separate Cochrane reviews (Ahmad 2015; Kew 2015)have synthesised the evidence for removing the LABA from theICS/LABA combination when treating children and adults withasthma. Stepping down the dose of ICS may reduce the likelihoodof unwanted side efects, particularly the systemic side efectsof steroid use (Colice 2006; SIGN/BTS 2016). Indeed, currentBritish Thoracic Society (BTS)/Scottish Intercollegiate GuidelinesNetwork (SIGN) guidelines recommend that ICS should be titratedto the lowest possible dose at which efective asthma control ismaintained (SIGN/BTS 2016). However, debate continues regardingthe best protocol for stepping down ICS treatment, particularly withrespect to the lowest acceptable dose of ICS and the rate of down-titration (Rogers 2012). Therefore, synthesis of the evidence for'stepping down ICS therapy' is important. Finally, ICS are among themost widely prescribed repeat medications and thus account for asubstantial proportion of drug spending in the United Kingdom andin other countries (NHS 2013). Any strategy to reduce the use of ICSmay thus represent an important cost-saving measure.O B J E C T I V E S
To evaluate the evidence for stepping down ICS treatment in adultswith well-controlled asthma who are already receiving a moderateor high dose of ICS.M E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesWe included parallel-group randomised controlled trials (RCTs) ofat least 12 weeks' duration. We included studies reported as fulltext, those published as abstract only and unpublished data. We didnot exclude studies on the basis of language or blinding.Types of participantsWe included adults (aged >= 18 years) whose asthma was wellcontrolled for a minimum of three months on at least a moderatedose of ICS (i.e. a dose of at least 400 mcg beclomethasonedipropionate (BDP) or equivalent) (SIGN/BTS 2016). We classifiedasthma control according to predefined criteria, for example, as perthe criteria described in GINA 2016 (i.e. daily symptoms twice or lessofen per week, use of rescue inhaler twice or less ofen per week,no nocturnal symptoms and no limitation to daily activities), or asper the asthma control questionnaire (i.e. a score less than 1.5).We excluded participants who had the following comorbidities/Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewscharacteristics: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),bronchiectasis or any other respiratory comorbidity.If studies enrolled adults and adolescents (aged 10 to 17 years)(WHO 2014), and data were not reported separately, we includedthe study if the mean age of participants in the intervention andcomparator groups was 18 years or older.Types of interventionsWe included trials that compared the following.
1. Reduction in the dose of ICS versus no change in the dose of ICS,in people with asthma whose condition was well controlled onat least a moderate dose of any ICS, but who were not taking aconcomitant LABA.2. Reduction in the dose of ICS versus no change in the dose ofICS, in people with asthma whose condition was well controlledon at least a moderate dose of any ICS and who were taking aconcomitant LABA.For both comparisons, a diferent ICS could be used in theintervention and comparator groups, provided both groups usedthe same beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) equivalent dose ofICS (>= 400 mcg) before randomisation. We excluded studies inwhich treatment with ICS was stopped, as this relates to a diferentclinical question. We included studies that permitted use of short-acting reliever medications, provided they were not part of therandomised treatment.For the latter comparison (patients taking a concomitant LABA),several studies included participants who used combination(ICS/LABA) inhalers; we excluded studies in which randomisedtreatment included a concurrent dose reduction of both ICS andLABA, because this strategy relates to a diferent clinical question.We also excluded studies if randomised treatment involved a step-down to single inhaler therapy (i.e. 'single inhaler maintenanceand reliever therapy' (SMART)) with a lower dose of ICS, becausethis also relates to a diferent clinical question that is addressed inanother review (Kew 2013).Types of outcome measures
1. Exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids2. Asthma control (measured on a validated scale; preferredmeasure is the Asthma Control Questionnaire (ACQ) score)3. All-cause serious adverse events4. Steroid-related adverse events1. Health-related quality of life (measured on a validated scale;preferred measure is the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire(AQLQ) score)2. Lung function indices (preferred measure is trough FEV1)3. Exacerbations requiring hospitalisation4. Exacerbations requiring an emergency department visit5. MortalityReporting one or more of these outcomes in a trial was not aninclusion criterion.We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group SpecialisedRegister (CAGR), which is maintained by the Group's TrialsSearch Co-ordinator. The Register contains trial reports identifiedthrough systematic searches of bibliographic databases includingthe Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL),MEDLINE, Embase, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and AlliedHealth Literature (CINAHL), the Allied and ComplementaryMedicine Database (AMED) and PsycINFO, and via handsearchesof respiratory journals and meeting abstracts (Appendix 1). Wesearched all records in the Cochrane Airways Group SpecialisedRegister using the search strategy presented in Appendix 2.We also conducted a search of ClinicalTrials.gov ( and the World Health Organization (WHO)International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) Search Portal( We searched all databases fromtheir inception to July 2016, and we imposed no restriction onlanguage of publication.Searching other resourcesWe checked the reference lists of all primary studies andreview articles for additional references. We searched relevantmanufacturers' websites for trial information.
On 4 October 2016, we searched for errata and retractions fromincluded studies published in full text on PubMed.Data collection and analysisSelection of studiesTwo  review authors (DE, NH) independently screened titles andabstracts for inclusion of all potential studies identified as a resultof the search and coded them as 'retrieve' (eligible or potentiallyeligible/unclear) or 'do not retrieve'. Two review authors (DE, NHor IC) independently retrieved and screened the full-text reports/publications to identify studies for inclusion, and to identify andrecord reasons for exclusion of ineligible studies. We resolveddisagreements through discussion, or, if required, we consulted athird review author (PM). We identified and excluded duplicatesand collated multiple reports of the same study, so that each studyrather than each report was the unit of interest in the review.We recorded the selection process in suficient detail to completea Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram and the Characteristics of excludedstudies table.Data extraction and managementWe used a data collection form to collect information on studycharacteristics and outcome data afer piloting the form on at leastone study included in the review. Two review authors (DE, NH)extracted the following study characteristics from included studiesin duplicate.1. Methods: study design, total duration of study, details of any'run-in' period, number of study centres and locations, studysetting, withdrawals, dates of study.2. Participants: N, mean age, age range, gender, severity ofcondition, diagnostic criteria, baseline lung function, smokingStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewshistory, inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria and details ofcriteria for stepping down treatment (clinical, e.g. symptoms,lung function, exacerbation history; airway responsiveness,e.g. mannitol challenge; inflammatory biomarkers, e.g. exhalednitric oxide).3. Interventions: intervention, comparison, concomitantmedications, excluded medications.4. Outcomes: primary and secondary outcomes specified andcollected, time points reported.5. Notes: funding for trial, notable conflicts of interest of trialauthors.Two review authors (IC, DE) independently extracted outcome datafrom included studies. We noted in the Characteristics of includedstudies table if outcome data were not reported in a useable way.We resolved disagreements by reaching consensus or by involvinga third review author (PM). One review author (DE) transferreddata into Cochrane's statistical sofware, Review Manager 2014.We double-checked that data were entered correctly by comparingdata presented in the systematic review against study reports. Asecond review author (NH) spot-checked study characteristics foraccuracy against the trial report.Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesTwo review authors (DE, PM) independently assessed risk of bias foreach study using Cochrane's tool for assessing risk of bias (Higgins2011). We resolved disagreements by discussion or by consultationwith another review author (IC or NH).
We assessed risk of bias according to the following domains.1. Random sequence generation.2. Allocation concealment.3. Blinding of participants and personnel.4. Blinding of outcome assessment.5. Incomplete outcome data.6. Selective outcome reporting.7. Other bias.We graded each potential source of bias as high, low or unclearand provided a quote from the study report together with ajustification for our judgement in a 'Risk of bias table'. Wesummarised risk of bias judgements across diferent studies foreach of the domains listed. We considered blinding separatelyfor diferent key outcomes when necessary (e.g. for unblindedoutcome assessment, risk of bias for all-cause mortality may bevery diferent from that observed for a patient-reported pain scale).When information on risk of bias was related to unpublished dataor correspondence with a trialist, we noted this in the 'Risk of biastable'.When considering treatment efects, we took into account the riskof bias for studies that contributed to that outcome.Assesment of bias in conducting the systematic reviewWe conducted the review according to this published protocol andreported any deviations from it in the Diferences between protocoland review section of the systematic review.Measures of treatment efectWe analysed dichotomous data as odds ratios (ORs), andcontinuous data as mean diferences (MDs). We entered datapresented as a scale with a consistent direction of efect. Whenincluded studies reported dichotomous data as risk ratios (RRs) orhazard ratios (HRs), we calculated and presented the ORs.
We undertook meta-analyses only when this was meaningful (i.e.when treatments, participants and the underlying clinical questionwere similar enough for pooling to make sense).We narratively described skewed data reported as medians andinterquartile ranges.When multiple trial arms were reported in a single trial, we includedonly the relevant arms. If two comparisons (e.g. drug A vs placeboand drug B vs placebo) were combined in the same meta-analysis,we halved the control group to avoid double-counting.When the duration of studies included in an analysis varied bymore than three months, we performed sensitivity analyses toexamine whether study duration influenced the treatment efect.If an influence of study duration was apparent, we re-expressedORs as a variety of numbers needed to treat (NNTs) across a rangeof assumed control risks (control group risks are likely to vary instudies of diferent duration) (Higgins 2011).Unit of analysis issuesFor dichotomous outcomes, we used participants, rather thanevents, as the unit of analysis (i.e. the number of participantsadmitted to hospital at least once rather than the numberof admissions per participant). We planned to also analyseexacerbations leading to admission or to a course of oral steroidsas rate ratios and time to event data, if these data were presented.Dealing with missing dataWe contacted investigators or study sponsors to verify key studycharacteristics and to obtain missing numerical outcome datawhen possible (e.g. when a study was identified as "abstractonly"). When this was not possible, and missing data were thoughtto introduce serious bias, we explored the impact of includingsuch studies in the overall assessment of results by performing asensitivity analysis.
Assessment of heterogeneityWe used the I2 statistic to measure heterogeneity among the trialsin each analysis. If we identified substantial heterogeneity (i.e. I2 >=50%), we reported this and explored possible causes by performingprespecified subgroup analysis.Assessment of reporting biasesAs we included only six studies, we were not able to pool more than10 trials to create a funnel plot to explore possible small study andpublication biases.Data synthesisWe used a random-efects model and planned to perform asensitivity analysis using a fixed-efect model.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews'Summary of findings' tableWe created a 'Summary of findings' table using all of theoutcomes listed above (Types of outcome measures), with theexception of mortality and exacerbations requiring an emergencydepartment visit. We used the five Grading of RecommendationsAssessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) considerations(study limitations, consistency of efect, imprecision, indirectnessand publication bias) to assess the quality of a body of evidence asit relates to studies that contributed data to the meta-analyses forprespecified outcomes. We used methods and recommendationsdescribed in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews ofInterventions and GRADEpro (GRADEproGDT) sofware ( We justified all decisions todowngrade or upgrade the quality of studies by using footnotes,and we made comments to aid readers' understanding of thereview when necessary.Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneityWe planned to carry out the following subgroup analyses.1. Rate of dose reduction (e.g. 25% dose reduction vs 50% dosereduction).2. Separate inhaler therapy versus combination inhaler therapy(i.e. ICS/LABA).
We planned to use the following primary outcomes in subgroupanalyses.1. Exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids.2. Asthma control.We used the formal test for subgroup interactions provided inReview Manager 2014.We planned to carry out the following sensitivity analyses.1. Unpublished data (i.e. no peer-reviewed full-text publicationavailable).2. Studies at unclear or high risk of bias for blinding.3. Fixed-efect versus random-efects models.4. Duration of included studies (e.g. short term (less than threemonths) vs longer term (more than three months)).5. Studies at high risk of any other bias versus those at low risk ofany other bias.R E S U L T SDescription of studiesThe Characteristics of included studies table presents details of theincluded studies. We reported in the Characteristics of excludedstudies table reasons for exclusion of studies considered duringreview of full-text articles.
We identified 983 records by performing electronic searches ofbibliographic databases and an additional 53 records by searchingclinicaltrials.gov. Of a total of 1034 records (two duplicatesremoved), we excluded most (n = 972) upon screening titles andabstracts. We examined full-text articles of the remaining 62 recordsand excluded 53 records (reporting 41 studies), primarily becausethe intervention did not meet the criteria for inclusion in thisreview (n = 27 studies). The interventions considered were typicallycomplex and dificult to separate from other components; thisresulted in a high rate of exclusions at full-text review stage. Otherreasons for exclusion at this stage included 'wrong study design' (n= 8), 'wrong comparator' (n = 3), 'wrong route of administration' (n= 2) and 'wrong patient population' (n = 1). The remaining 11records reported the findings of six studies, which we included inthis review. Figure 1 depicts the flow of information through thediferent stages of this systematic review. Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsIncluded studiesSix studies met the inclusion criteria and contributed data to theanalyses (Godard 2008; Gunn 1997; Hawkins 2003; Juniper 1991;Knox 2007; Magnussen 2000). The six included studies randomiseda total of 1654 participants (ICS dose reduction, no concomitantLABA: n = 892; ICS dose reduction, concomitant LABA: n = 762). Thelargest (Gunn 1997) and smallest (Juniper 1991) studies included631 and 28 participants, respectively. All included studies werereported as full peer-reviewed articles.All included studies were RCTs with a parallel design that compareda fixed dose of ICS versus a reduced dose of ICS. Two studiesincluded three arms (Godard 2008; Gunn 1997), and in one of these,only two out of three arms were relevant to this review (Godard2008). Five studies were performed as double-blind, and one studywas open-label (Gunn 1997). Five studies reported a run-in period(duration two to eight weeks), and one study was an extension of aprevious 12-month study (Juniper 1991). Duration of the treatmentperiod ranged from 12 to 52 weeks (mean duration 21 weeks;median duration 14 weeks). Outcome data were reported at the lasttime point reported for each study. Most studies were performedin Europe (Godard 2008; Gunn 1997; Hawkins 2003; Knox 2007;Magnussen 2000), and one study in Canada (Juniper 1991). Twostudies were conducted in the setting of primary care (Gunn 1997;Hawkins 2003), two were conducted in the secondary care setting(Juniper 1991; Magnussen 2000) and two reported no informationon setting (Godard 2008; Knox 2007).
We included studies that recruited adult participants aged >= 18years or in which most participants were adults. When reported,the age range of participants across included studies was 16.2 to86 years (Godard 2008; Gunn 1997; Hawkins 2003; Knox 2007); inthe two studies for which the age range was not reported, themean age of participants was approximately 40 years (Juniper1991; Magnussen 2000). Participants in the included studies hadasthma that was generally well controlled by regular preventivetherapy (i.e. step 2 of the BTS/SIGN guidelines; SIGN/BTS 2016)(Gunn 1997; Juniper 1991; Knox 2007; Magnussen 2000), with theuse of high-dose ICS (>= 1000 mg BDP) (Hawkins 2003) or with an add-on therapy (i.e. step 3 of the BTS/SIGN guidelines) (Godard 2008).When reported, most participants were non-smokers (Godard 2008;Hawkins 2003; Knox 2007).All included studies compared a 50% to 60% reduction in dose ofICS versus no change in ICS dose. In terms of the type and baselinedose of ICS, studies included a variety of comparisons: fluticasonepropionate (FP) 250 mg twice daily versus ciclesonide 160 mg oncedaily (representing a 50% reduction according to Global Initiativefor Asthma (GINA) guidelines) (Knox 2007); a 50% reduction in doseof any ICS (as used before the study) (Hawkins 2003); salmeterol/fluticasone combination (SFC) 50/100 mg twice daily versus nochange (SFC 50/250 mg twice daily) (Godard 2008); a 50% reductionin dose of budesonide versus no change in budesonide dose (anydose) (Juniper 1991); and chlorofluorocarbon beclomethasone1000 mg/day versus hydrofluoroalkane beclomethasone 400 mg/day (< 50% reduction) (Magnussen 2000). The study comparisonreported by Gunn and colleagues (Gunn 1997) was as follows:
Inhaler devices varied across studies but were consistent betweenintervention and control groups in at least three of the sixincluded studies. One study used a Diskus dry powder inhaler(Godard 2008); another used the Autohaler, a breath-actuatedmetered-dose inhaler (MDI) (Magnussen 2000); one study used ahydrofluoroalkane MDI (Knox 2007); another did not report thedevice used (Juniper 1991); one study permitted the use of anMDI or a dry powder inhaler as long as the same device wasused throughout the study (Hawkins 2003); and another used theTurbohaler for participants in the intervention group and an MDI forthose in the comparator group (Gunn 1997) and considered the twoinhaler types to be equivalent for a given dose.OutcomesExcluded studiesWe excluded 53 references (related to 41 studies) followingassessment of full-text articles (Characteristics of excludedstudies). We excluded 27 studies as they used an intervention thatwas not relevant to this review (e.g. a dose reduction of ICS wasnot used, or a concomitant reduction in ICS and LABA was used).Eight studies were excluded because they used a study designnot appropriate for this review (e.g. cross-over or non-randomiseddesign). We excluded six studies because they used a comparatornot relevant to this review (n = 3; e.g. a dose reduction in the controlgroup) or a route of administration not relevant to this review wasused (n = 2; e.g. the intervention was OCS, not ICS) or because thepatient population studied was not relevant (n = 1; e.g. participantswere children).Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsRisk of bias in included studiesPlease refer to the Characteristics of included studies tables fordetails on risk of bias and for supporting evidence for eachstudy. Figure 2 provides a summary of risk of bias judgements,presented by study and domain (sequence generation, allocationconcealment, blinding, incomplete data, selective reporting and'other'). Figure 3 depicts the risk of bias for each domain, presentedas percentages across all included studies. Figure 2.   Risk of bias summary: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item for each included study.  Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews AllocationMost studies (five of six) provided insuficient information regardingmethods of random sequence generation and concealment oftreatment allocation to allow a judgement on risk of bias (Godard2008; Gunn 1997; Juniper 1991; Knox 2007; Magnussen 2000);therefore, the risk of bias for these studies was unclear. Onestudy (Hawkins 2003) used a computer-generated randomisationsequence and concealed allocation method, and was considered tobe at low risk for selection bias.We considered five of six studies (Godard 2008; Hawkins 2003;Juniper 1991; Knox 2007; Magnussen 2000) to have low risk ofperformance and detection bias, as participants, personnel andoutcome assessors were blinded to treatment allocation throughadequate methods. One study (Gunn 1997) used an open-labeldesign, in which participants, personnel and outcome assessorswere not blinded to treatment allocation; we considered this studyto be at high risk of both performance and detection bias.We considered all studies to be at low risk of attrition bias on thebasis of low and balanced rates of participant withdrawal, whichwere adequately documented in the trial report.We judged five studies (Godard 2008; Gunn 1997; Hawkins 2003;Juniper 1991; Magnussen 2000) to be at high risk of reportingbias because no study protocol was available and there appearedto be either non-standard presentation of the data or selectivereporting of data that were likely recorded. One study (Knox 2007)appeared to report a fairly comprehensive set of outcomes (i.e.exacerbations, steroid-related AEs, all-cause SAEs, lung functionand asthma control); however, a protocol was not available, so wejudged the risk of bias as unclear.
Other potential sources of biasWe judged four studies to be at low risk of other bias, as noother concerns were identified (Hawkins 2003; Juniper 1991;Knox 2007; Magnussen 2000). We considered Godard 2008 tobe at high risk of other bias because, contrary to the methodsdescribed, investigators randomised a relatively high proportionof participants who had asthma that was not well controlled andincluded them in the full analysis set. We judged Gunn 1997 tobe at unclear risk of bias because there appeared to be somechanges in the inhaler used to deliver the ICS at the same time aschanges in dose, although we noted that the two inhaler types wereconsidered equivalent for a given dose.Efects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings for the main comparison ICS dosereduction compared with no change in ICS dose (no concomitantLABA) for adults with asthma; Summary of findings 2 ICS dosereduction compared with no change in ICS dose (concomitantLABA) for adults with asthmaStructure of the analysisAs per the protocol, we chose to analyse participants who werereceiving a concomitant LABA separately from those who were notreceiving a concomitant LABA.Structure of the meta-analysisWe created two main comparison headings within the analysistree. For each comparison, we elected to perform a meta-analysisonly when interventions and outcomes were suficiently similar forpooling of the data.
Participants not taking concomitant a LABA: ICS reductionversus no change in ICS doseThis comparison comprised all studies that compared a reductionin the dose of ICS versus no change in ICS dose amongparticipantsnot taking a concomitant LABA (Gunn 1997; Knox 2007;Magnussen 2000).Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsParticipants taking a concomitant LABA: ICS reduction versusno change in ICS doseThis comparison comprised all studies that compared a reductionin the dose of ICS versus no change in ICS dose among participantstaking a concomitant LABA (Godard 2008; Hawkins 2003; Juniper1991)Structure of the narrative synthesisIn the following sections, we present a narrative summaryof study results according to the prespecified outcomes. Wepresent primary outcomes (exacerbations requiring OCS, asthmacontrol, all-cause SAEs, steroid-related AEs) followed by secondaryoutcomes (health-related QoL, lung function, exacerbationsrequiring hospitalisation, exacerbations requiring an emergencydepartment visit, mortality). For each outcome, we describethe efect of the intervention among participants not taking aconcomitant LABA followed by the efect of the intervention amongparticipants taking a LABA.Primary outcomes
Exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroidsStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to exacerbations requiring treatment with oral steroids(odds ratio (OR) 1.86, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.16 to 21.09; n= 261 participants, two studies; I2 = 0%; Analysis 1.1; Figure 4). Forpeople who stepped down their dose of ICS, we estimated that sixmore people per 1000 would have an exacerbation requiring oralsteroids, but the confidence intervals ranged from seven fewer to132 more people per 1000. We rated the quality of the evidenceas very low afer downgrading twice for imprecision (no eventswere reported by one of the contributing studies, and confidenceintervals include the null efect (risk ratio (RR) 1.0) and appreciablebenefit (RR 0.75) or harm (RR 1.25)) and once for indirectness, as theevidence was based on studies operating out of specialist centres. Figure 4.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA),outcome: 1.1 Exacerbation requiring OCS.Stepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to exacerbations requiring treatment with oral steroids(OR 1.31, 95% CI 0.82 to 2.08; n = 569 participants; two studies; I2= 0%; Analysis 2.1; Figure 5). For people who stepped down theirdose of ICS (versus those with no change in ICS dose), we estimated
that 38 more people per 1000 would have an exacerbation requiringoral steroids, but the confidence intervals ranged from 23 fewer to118 more people per 1000. We rated the quality of the evidence aslow afer downgrading once for risk of bias (selective reporting) andonce for imprecision (confidence intervals include null efect andappreciable benefit (RR 0.75) or harm (RR 1.25)). Figure 5.   Forest plot of comparison: 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA),outcome: 2.1 Exacerbation requiring OCS.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Asthma control
ICS stepdown, no concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to asthma control (mean diference (MD) -0.22, 95% CI-1.05 to 0.61; n = 150 participants; one study; Analysis 1.2). We ratedthe quality of the evidence as low afer downgrading once for riskof bias (selective reporting) and once for indirectness (single studyrepresentative of a single setting and drug regimen).Stepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to asthma control as measured by the short asthmamorbidity score (change from baseline: MD 0.16, 95% CI -0.34 to0.66; n = 242 participants; one study; scale 0 (perfect control) to8 (very poor control); Analysis 2.2). We rated the quality of theevidence as low afer downgrading once for risk of bias (selectivereporting) and once for indirectness (single study representativeof a single setting and drug regimen). Nor did stepping down thedose of ICS result in clear benefit or harm with respect to asthmacontrol as measured by the Asthma Severity Questionnaire (MD1.13, 95% CI -0.24 to 2.49; scale 0 (best control) to 6 (worst control);Analysis 2.3). We rated the quality of the evidence as very lowafer downgrading once for risk of bias (selective reporting), oncefor indirectness (single study representative of a single settingand drug regimen) and once for imprecision (confidence intervalsinclude the null efect (MD 0) and appreciable harm (MD 1.5)).
All-cause SAEsICS stepdown, no concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit orharm with respect to SAEs (OR 1.24, 95% CI 0.25 to 6.25; n = 742participants; two studies; I2 = 5%; Analysis 1.3; Figure 6). For peoplewho stepped down their dose of ICS (versus those with no changein ICS dose), we estimated that 1 more person per 1000 would havean SAE, but confidence intervals ranged from six fewer to 37 morepeople per 1000. We rated the quality of the evidence as low aferdowngrading once for risk of bias (selective reporting) and oncefor imprecision (confidence intervals include the null efect andappreciable benefit (RR 0.75) or harm (RR 1.25)). Figure 6.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA),outcome: 1.3 All-cause SAEs. ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit orharm with respect to SAEs (OR 0.60, 95% CI 0.11 to 3.33; n = 569participants; two studies; I2 = 35%; Analysis 2.4; Figure 7). Forpeople who stepped down their dose of ICS (versus those with nochange in ICS dose), we estimated that 13 fewer people per 1000would have an SAE, but the confidence intervals ranged from 31fewer to 74 more people per 1000. We rated the quality of theevidence as low afer downgrading once for risk of bias (selectivereporting) and once for imprecision (confidence intervals includenull efect and appreciable benefit (RR 0.75) or harm (RR 1.25)). 
Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Steroid-related AEsICS stepdown, no concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to steroid-related AEs (OR 0.76, 95% CI 0.16 to 3.54; n= 261 participants; two studies; I2 = 0%; Analysis 1.4; Figure 8). Forpeople who stepped down their dose of ICS (versus those with nochange in ICS dose), we estimated that eight fewer people per 1000would have a steroid-related AE, but confidence intervals rangedfrom 26 fewer to 69 more people per 1000. We rated the qualityof the evidence as very low afer downgrading once for risk ofbias (selective reporting), once for indirectness (representative ofspecialist centres) and once for imprecision (confidence intervalsinclude the null efect and appreciable benefit (RR 0.75) or harm (RR1.25)). Figure 8.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA),outcome: 1.4 Steroid-related AEs. ICS stepdown, concomitant LABANo included studies reported data for steroid-related AEs.Secondary outcomesHealth-related quality of lifeICS stepdown, no concomitant LABAThere was a statistically significant diference in health-relatedquality of life (change from baseline) between groups as measuredby the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (change from baseline:MD -0.21, 95% CI -0.33 to -0.09; n = 554 participants, one study; scale0 (worst) to 7 (best); Analysis 1.5). However, the mean diference and95% confidence limits were below the minimal clinically importantdiference (MCID) of 0.5, indicating no clinically relevant diferencebetween groups. We rated the quality of the evidence as very lowafer downgrading twice for risk of bias (selective reporting and
lack of blinding for a subjective outcome measure) and once forindirectness (single study representative of a single setting anddrug regimen).ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no benefit or harm withrespect to health-related quality of life as measured by St George'sRespiratory Scale (change from baseline: MD 0.13, 95% CI -2.80 to3.06; n = 229 participants, one study; scale 0 to 100 (greatest impactof chest disease on life); Analysis 2.6) or the EuroQoL (changefrom baseline: MD 2.32, 95% CI -1.64 to 6.28; n = 219 participants,one study; scale 0 to 100 (best imaginable health state); Analysis2.5). With regards to the St George's Respiratory Scale, the meandiference and 95% confidence limits were below the MCID of 4units, indicating no clinically relevant diference between groups.We rated the quality of the evidence as low afer downgrading onceStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
for risk of bias (selective reporting) and once for indirectness (singlestudy representative of a single setting and drug regimen).Lung functionICS stepdown, no concomitant LABAchange in percent predicted FEV1 (MD -0.02, 95% CI -0.12 to 0.08; n= 261 participants, two studies; I2 = 0%; Analysis 1.7; Figure 9) norin morning PEFR (MD -5.98 L/min, 95% CI -19.47 to 7.51; n = 875participants, three studies; I2 = 0%; Analysis 1.6; Figure 10). We ratedthe quality of the evidence as low afer downgrading once for riskof bias (selective reporting) and once for imprecision (confidenceintervals include the null efect and appreciable benefit (RR 0.75) orharm (RR 1.25)). Figure 9.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA),outcome: 1.7 Lung function, FEV1 (L). ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAExacerbations requiring hospitalisationICS stepdown, no concomitant LABANo studies reported the number of participants requiringhospitalisation.ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to exacerbations requiring hospitalisation (OR 4.06,95% CI 0.45 to 36.86; n = 569 participants, two studies; I2 = 0%;Analysis 2.9; Figure 11). For people who stepped down their doseof ICS (versus those with no change in ICS dose), we estimated that10 more people per 1000 would have an exacerbation requiringhospitalisation, but the confidence intervals ranged from 2 fewer to112 more people per 1000. We rated the quality of the evidence aslow afer downgrading once for risk of bias (selective reporting) andonce for imprecision (wide CI).Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 Figure 11.   Forest plot of comparison: 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitant LABA),outcome: 2.9 Exacerbation requiring hospitalisation. Exacerbations requiring an emergency department visitICS stepdown, no concomitant LABANo studies reported the number of participants requiring anemergency department visit.ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmwith respect to exacerbations requiring an emergency departmentvisit (OR 2.00, 95% CI 0.18 to 22.33; n = 259 participants, one study;Analysis 2.10). For people who stepped down their dose of ICS(versus those with no change in ICS dose), we estimated that 7more people per 1000 would have an exacerbation requiring anemergency department visit, but confidence intervals ranged from7 fewer to 141 more people per 1000. We rated the quality ofthe evidence as very low afer downgrading once for risk of bias(selective reporting), once for imprecision (wide CI) and once forindirectness (single study representative of a single setting anddrug regimen).MortalityICS stepdown, no concomitant LABA
No studies reported mortality data.ICS stepdown, concomitant LABAStepping down the dose of ICS resulted in no clear benefit or harmin terms of mortality; the single study reporting data (N = 310participants; Analysis 2.11) reported no deaths in either group. Werated the quality of the evidence as very low afer downgradingonce for risk of bias (selective reporting), once for indirectness(single study representative of a single setting and drug regimen)and once for imprecision (no events reported).Subgroup analysesMagnitude of dose reductionReview authors did not perform this prespecified subgroupanalysis for either comparison because all of the included studiesrepresented a 50% to 60% reduction in ICS dose.Separate ICS/LABA inhalers versus combination ICS/LABAinhalerThis was relevant only to the second comparison (participants whowere permitted to receive a concomitant LABA).
For exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids, the use ofindividual ICS and LABA inhalers (Hawkins 2003) versus a combinedinhaler (Godard 2008) did not appear to influence the overall OR(1.31, 95% CI 0.82 to 2.08) because results of the two contributingstudies were comparable (OR 1.29, 95% CI 0.75 to 2.23 (Hawkins2003) and OR 1.34, 95% CI 0.55 to 3.28 (Godard 2008), respectively).We could not perform a subgroup analysis for asthma control asonly one study contributed data to each measure of asthma control(short asthma morbidity score (Hawkins 2003) and asthma severityquestionnaire (Juniper 1991)).It was not possible for review authors to conduct the plannedsensitivity analyses because of the paucity of included studiescontributing to each outcome examined.D I S C U S S I O NSummary of main resultsWe included six studies, which randomised a total of 1654participants (inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) dose reduction, noconcomitant long-acting beta agonist (LABA): n = 892 participants,three randomised controlled trials (RCTs); ICS dose reduction,concomitant LABA: n = 762, three RCTs). All included studies wereRCTs with a parallel design that compared a fixed dose of ICS with a50% to 60% reduction in the dose of ICS among adult participantswith well-controlled asthma. The duration of treatment rangedfrom 12 to 52 weeks (mean duration 21 weeks; median duration 14weeks). Two studies were performed in the setting of primary care,two were performed in the secondary care setting and two providedno information on setting.Meta-analysis was hampered by the small number of studiesthat contributed to each comparison, combined with diferencesamong outcomes reported in the included studies. However, alow level of heterogeneity was observed in the meta-analyses thatStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewswere performed. We found no statistically significant diferencesbetween groups (step-down of ICS vs no change in ICS) with respectto any of the primary or secondary outcomes considered in thisreview and thus were unable to determine whether stepping downthe dose of ICS in adults with asthma (compared with maintainingthe previous dose of ICS) confers overall benefit. On one hand, wedid not identify a statistically significant between-group diferencefor measures of efectiveness such as asthma control, lung functionor the number of participants experiencing exacerbations, whichwould support the guideline-recommended use of an ICS dosereduction for patients with well-controlled asthma. However, wenoted a numerical trend towards a greater number of participantsexperiencing exacerbations, and we observed no benefit in termsof other safety outcomes. Moreover, we rated the quality of theevidence as generally low or very low, which means that we cannotbe confident in the efect estimates (see below). Finally, whetherconcomitant treatment with a LABA influences the benefit/harmratio for stepping down ICS remains unclear.Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Two of the included studies were performed in the primarycare setting, two in the secondary care setting and in twocases the setting was not reported. Each comparison (+- LABA)included one study in each of these three categories (primarycare, secondary care, not stated); however, owing to the smallnumber of studies contributing to each outcome, some outcomesmay have been more representative of a particular setting. Whenthis was the case, we accounted for this factor by downgradingthe quality of the evidence for indirectness. Furthermore, singlestudies (representative of a single regimen or treatment duration)contributed to several of the outcomes, and most of the meta-analyses comprised only two studies. Therefore, our results maybe relevant to the particular treatment regimens represented inthe individual studies. Finally, our results are relevant only toadult patients. It is possible that potential harms due to systemicefects associated with long-term ICS use might be more relevantto children. To examine this, we would need to consider includingpaediatric studies in future iterations of this review, or in a separatereview.One of the concerns associated with stepping down the doseof ICS in patients with well-controlled asthma is possible slowdeterioration in asthma control over time as bronchial hyper-responsiveness slowly returns. Moreover, long-term exposure tosteroids may result in the development of systemic side efectssuch as loss of bone density in adults and growth retardation inchildren (Colice 2006; Lipworth 1999; SIGN/BTS 2016). The meanduration of the included studies was 21 weeks (median duration14 weeks), which is potentially insuficient for detecting long-termdeterioration in asthma control/lung function or for adequatelyassessing long-term safety outcomes.
Quality of the evidenceFew relevant studies met the prespecified criteria for inclusion;this fact, combined with the use of varied outcome measuresacross included studies, limited the number of meta-analysesthat we could perform. In terms of risk of bias, the includedstudies were generally of moderate quality, although selectivereporting introduced risk of bias in five out of six included studies.Furthermore, it was not clear whether adequate methods ofrandomisation sequence generation or concealment of allocationwere used in all but one study.We assessed the quality of evidence in this review using GRADE(Higgins 2011) and GRADEpro sofware; our findings in the'Summary of findings tables'. Summary of findings for the maincomparison presents our findings for the first comparison (steppingdown ICS vs no change in ICS, in patients not receiving aconcomitant LABA), and Summary of findings 2 presents ourfindings for the second comparison (stepping down ICS vs nochange in ICS, in patients receiving a concomitant LABA). Insummary, for both comparisons, we assessed the quality of thesynthesised evidence as low or very low for most outcomes becauseof risk of bias (principally, selective reporting), imprecision (fewevents in a small number of studies, or wide confidence intervals)and indirectness (single studies representative of a single setting ordrug regimen). Based on the quality of the evidence, we cannot beconfident about the efect estimates presented in this review.
Potential biases in the review processWe followed standard procedures as described in the CochraneHandbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011)to minimise bias in the review process. With regard to thesearch process, the Cochrane Airways Group Information Specialistdesigned and conducted the main electronic search, two reviewauthors independently sifed the search results and two reviewauthors (one with expert clinical knowledge) reviewed the full-textresults. Consistent with Cochrane methods, we excluded no trialson the basis of language, publication status or outcomes reported,so we are confident that we identified all potentially relevantevidence from RCTs. In terms of our findings and conclusions, tworeview authors independently performed all steps in the reviewprocess for which a subjective decision was required (e.g. selectionof studies, extraction of data, assessment of risk of bias, assessmentof the overall quality of evidence using GRADE), and, if necessary,a third review author assisted in resolving disagreements. Finally,this review has undergone editorial and peer review such thatthe opinion of independent external experts has been considered.Together, these factors should ensure that our conclusions fairlyrepresent the results synthesised during the review process.
Agreements and disagreements with other studies orreviewsOur findings agree well with those of a systematic review(Gionfriddo 2015) that examined the evidence for stepping downthe dose of ICS from a scheduled regimen to an as-needed basis.Those review authors found insuficient evidence to associatestepping down ICS dose with an efect on the number of asthmaexacerbations. In contrast, the authors found some evidence forfewer symptom-free days in patients who used an ICS on an as-needed basis. In another systematic review, Hagan and colleaguessimilarly found that asthma exacerbations were statistically nomore likely among individuals who reduced ICS than among thosewho maintained their ICS dose (Hagan 2014). The Hagan reviewincluded studies of both adults and children and permitted step-down to ICS on an as-needed basis. Nevertheless, their findings areconsistent with those of our review.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsA U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practiceThe efect of reducing ICS dose, in the presence or absence ofa LABA, on exacerbations and disease control in asthma remainsunknown. In addition, whether this strategy impacts quality of life,hospitalisations and adverse events (steroid related or otherwise)is unclear.Implications for researchIn light of considerable uncertainty around efect estimates, inparticular for outcomes related to long-term safety, additional well-designed RCTs are required to examine safety and efectiveness inpatients who step down their dose of ICS compared with those whomaintain their existing dose. It would be prudent for future trialsto use validated measures to examine asthma control (e.g. AsthmaControl Score) and health-related quality of life (e.g. Asthma Qualityof Life Questionnaire). Future trials ideally should last longer thansix months (substantially longer periods would be beneficial), first,to permit adequate monitoring of safety outcomes, in particular, ofpotential systemic efects associated with long-term use of ICS, andsecond, to ensure that slow deterioration of asthma control/lungfunction does not occur over time. Measurement of airway hyper-responsiveness or airway inflammation at baseline and duringfollow-up may serve to explain why the condition of some patientsdeteriorates, and others maintain control on lower doses.A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SThe Background and Methods sections of this review are basedon a standard template used by the Cochrane Airways ReviewGroup. Thank you to Elizabeth Stovold for assisting with the searchstrategy, and to Chris Cates, Emma Welsh, Sally Spencer and SteveMilan for providing advice and support.Rebecca Normansell was the Editor for this review and commentedcritically on the review.
The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) is the largestsingle funder of the work carried out by the Cochrane AirwaysReview Group. The views and opinions expressed therein are thoseof the review authors and do not necessarily reflect those of theNIHR, the National Health Service or the Department of Health.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewGodard 2008 {published data only}Godard P, Attali V. Comparison of diferent treatment strategiesin stepping down combination treatment withdrawing the LABAversus reducing the ICS dose [Abstract]. Proceedings of theAmerican Thoracic Society. 2006:A213.Godard P, Greillier P, Pigearias B, Nachbaur G, Desfougeres J-L, Attali V. Maintaining asthma control in persistent asthma:comparison of three strategies in a 6-month double-blindrandomised study. Respiratory Medicine 2008;102(8):1124-31.Gunn 1997 {published data only}Gunn SD, Choudhury M, Au K, Burnett RJ, Black HL, Turbitt ML.Inhaled steroid treatment reduction in stable asthmatics: acomparison of beclomethasone/budesonide metered doseinhaler with half dose treatment using budesonide Turbohaler,given once or twice daily. British Journal of Clinical Research1997;8:67-80.Hawkins 2003 {published data only}Hawkins G, McMahon AD, Twaddle S, Wood SF, Ford I,Thompson NC. Stepping down inhaled corticosteroids inasthma: a randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2002;57(SupplIII):iii11.Hawkins G, McMahon AD, Twaddle S, Wood SF,Ford I, Thomson NC, et al. Stepping down inhaledcorticosteroids in asthma: randomised controlled trial. BMJ2003;326(7399):1115-8.See S, Rubin S. Tapering inhaled steroids efective for chronicasthma. Journal of Family Practice 2003;52(10):748-51.
Juniper 1991 {published data only}Juniper EF, Kline PA, Vanzieleghem MA, Hargreave FE. Reductionof budesonide afer a year of increased use: a randomisedcontrolled trial to evaluate whether improvements in airwayresponsiveness and clinical asthma are maintained. Journal ofAllergy and Clinical Immunology 1991;87(2):483-9.Knox 2007 {published data only}Knox A, Langan J, Martinot JB, Gruss C, Hofner D. Comparisonof a step-down dose of once-daily ciclesonide with a continueddose of twice-daily fluticasone propionate in maintainingcontrol of asthma. Current Medical Research Opinion2007;23(10):2387-94.Magnussen 2000 {published data only}Magnussen H, Magnussen H, Comparative Inhaled SteroidInvestigation Group CISIG. Equivalent asthma control afer dosereduction with HFA-134a beclomethasone solution aerosol.Respiratory Medicine 2000;94(6):549-55. References to studies excluded from this review
Aalbers 2004 {published data only}Aalbers R. Fixed or adjustable maintenance-dose budesonide/formoterol compared with fixed maintenance-dose salmeterol/fluticasone propionate in asthma patients aged [greater-than orequal to]16 years: post hoc analysis of a randomized, double-blind open-label extension, parallel-group study. Clinical DrugInvestigation 2010;30(7):439-51.Aalbers R, Backer V, Kava TT, Omenaas ER, Sandstrom T,Jorup C, et al. Adjustable maintenance dosing with budesonide/formoterol compared with fixed-dose salmeterol/fluticasone inmoderate to severe asthma. Current Medical Research Opinion2004;20(2):225-40.Aalbers R, Harris A, Naya I. Adjustable dosing with budesonide/formoterol achieves sustained guideline 'well-controlledasthma' following step down in treatment [Abstract]. EuropeanRespiratory Journal. 2005; Vol. 26:Abstract No. 431.Adachi 2001 {published data only}Adachi M, Kohno Y, Minoguchi K, Yasurou K, Kochno Y.Step-down and step-up therapy in moderate persistentasthma. International Archives of Allergy and Immunology2001;124(1-3):414-6.ALA 2007 {published data only}The American Lung Association Asthma Clinical ResearchCenters. Randomized comparison of strategies for reducingtreatment in mild persistent asthma. New England Journal ofMedicine 2007;356(20):2027-39.
Anonymous 1979 {published data only}Anonymous. Double-blind trial comparing two dosageschedules of beclomethasone dipropionate aerosol with aplacebo in chronic bronchial asthma. Second report of theBrompton Hospital/Medical Research Council CollaborativeTrial. British Journal of Diseases of the Chest 1979;73(2):121-32.Baba 1999 {published data only}Baba K, Hattori T, Sakakibara A, Kobayashi T, Takagi K. Theusefulness of pranlukast or seratrodast for step-down of inhaledcorticosteroid therapy in adult chronic asthma. AmericanJournal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 1999;159(3;Part 2 of 2):A626.Baba 2000 {published data only}Baba K, Hattori T, Koishikawa I, Yoshida K, Kobayashi T,Takagi K. Serum eosinophil cationic protein for predicting theprognosis of a step-down in inhaled corticosteroid therapy inadult chronic asthmatics. Journal of Asthma 2000;37(5):399-408.Bateman 2005 {published data only}Bateman E, Atienza T, Mihaescu T, Duggan M, Jacques L,Goldfrad C. Asthma control is maintained if treatment withfluticasone propionate/salmeterol (FSC; advair/seretide) isstepped down [Abstract]. American Thoracic Society 2005International Conference. 2005:C12.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsBateman ED, Jacques L, Goldfrad C, Atienza T, Mihaescu T,Duggan M. Asthma control can be maintained when fluticasonepropionate/salmeterol in a single inhaler is stepped down.Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2006;117(3):563-70.Belda 2006 {published data only}Belda J, Parameswaran K, Lemiere C, Kamada D, O'Byrne PM,Hargreave FE. Predictors of loss of asthma control inducedby corticosteroid withdrawal. Canadian Respiratory Journal2006;13(3):129-33.
Boulet 1990 {published data only}Boulet LP, Cartier A, Cockcrof DW, Gruber JM, Laberge F,MacDonald GF, et al. Tolerance to reduction of oral steroiddosage in severely asthmatic patients receiving nedocromilsodium. Respiratory Medicine 1990;84(4):317-23.Brambilla 1994 {published data only}Brambilla C, Godard P, Lacronique J, Allaert FA, Duroux P,Blaive B, et al. A 3-month comparative dose-reduction studywith inhaled beclomethasone dipropionate and budesonidein the management of moderate to severe adult asthma. DrugInvestigation 1994;8(1):49-56.Britton 1997 {published data only}Britton MG, Bone MF, Boyd G, Catterall JR, Ward MJ, Richards K.Comparison of a lower fixed dose of inhaled fluticasonepropionate FP with a high dose step-down regimen of FPin the prevention of re-exacerbations afer an acute severeattack of asthma requiring oral corticosteroid therapy. Thorax1997;52(Suppl 6):A1/S3.Bruggenjurgen 2005 {published data only}Bruggenjurgen B, Selim D, Kardos P, Richter K, Vogelmeier C,Roll S, et al. Economic assessment of adjustable maintenancetreatment with budesonide/formoterol in a single inhalerversus fixed treatment in asthma. Pharmacoeconomics2005;23(7):723-31.
Busse 2003 {published data only}Busse W, Koenig SM, Oppenheimer J, Sahn SA, Yancey SW,Reilly D, et al. Steroid-sparing efects of fluticasone propionate100 microg and salmeterol 50 microg administered twicedaily in a single product in patients previously controlled withfluticasone propionate 250 microg administered twice daily.Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 2003;111(2):57-65.Campbell 1998 {published data only}Campbell LM, Gooding TN, Aitchison WR, Smith N, Powell JA.Initial loading (400 micrograms twice daily) versus static (400micrograms nocte) dose budesonide for asthma management.PLAN Research Group. International Journal of Clinical Practice1998;52(6):361-8, 370.Casale 2003 {published data only}Casale TB, Nelson HS, Kemp J, Parasuraman B, Uryniak T,Liljas B. Budesonide Turbuhaler delivered once daily improveshealth-related quality of life and maintains improvements witha stepped-down dose in adults with mild to moderate asthma.Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology 2003;90(3):323-30.Chanez 2001 {published data only}Chanez P, Karlstrom R, Godard P. High or standard initial doseof budesonide to control mild-to-moderate asthma?. EuropeanRespiratory Journal 2001;17(5):856-62.
Chiu 2011 {published data only}Chiu K-C, Hsu J-Y, Lin M-S, Liu W-T, Wang C-H, Kuo H-P.Comparison of the eficacy of cicleosonide with budesonidein mild to moderate asthma patients afer step-down therapy[Abstract]. European Respiratory Society Annual Congress.2011; Vol. 38:721s [P3965].Chiu KC, Chou YL, Hsu JY, Lin MS, Lin CH, Chou PC, et al.Comparison of the eficacy of ciclesonide with that ofbudesonide in mild to moderate asthma patients afer step-down therapy: a randomised parallel-group study. NPJ PrimaryCare Respiratory Medicine 2014;24:14010.Chung 2002 {published data only}Chung KF, Holgate S, O'Brien J, Fox H, Thirlwell J. Inhaledcorticosteroid dose reducing efect of amalizumab in patientswith controlled, severe asthma according to usage of inhaledlong acting beta agonists [Abstract]. Journal of Allergy, Asthmaand Immunolgy 2002;109(Suppl 1):Abstract No: 726.Davies 1977 {published data only}Davies G, Thomas P, Broder I, Mintz S, Silverman F, Leznof A,et al. Steroid-dependent asthma treated with inhaledbeclomethasone dipropionate. A long-term study. Annals ofInternal Medicine 1977;86(5):549-53.Dorinsky 2003 {published data only}
Dorinsky P, Staufer J, Waitkus-Edwards K, Yancey S,Prillaman BA, Sutton L. "Stepping down" from fluticasonepropionate/salmeterol 100/50mcg diskus results in loss ofasthma control [Abstract]. European Respiratory Journal2004;24(Suppl 48):309s.Dorinsky P, Yancey S, Reilly D, Staufer J, Edwards L, Sutton L.Control of airway inflammation is maintained in asthmapatients following a reduction in ICS dose with fluticasonepropionate/salmeterol (FSC) compared with higher dosefluticasone propionate (FP) alone [Abstract]. EuropeanRespiratory Journal. 2004; Vol. 24:308s.Dorinsky PM, Staufer J, Waitkus-Edwards K, Yancey S,Prillaman BA, Sutton L. "Stepping down" from fluticasonepropionate/salmeterol 100/50mcg Diskus(R) results in loss ofasthma control: lack of efect of ethnic origin [Abstract]. Chest2004;126(4 Suppl):758S-a.Dorinsky PM, Yancey SW, Reilly D, Edwards L. The efectivenessof fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 100/50mcg Diskus(R) (FSC)as an inhaled corticosteroid-sparing agent: efect of baselineasthma severity [Abstract]. Chest. 2003; Vol. 124:87S-b, 88.Dorinsky PM, Yancey SW, Waitkus-Edwards K, Edwards L,Dorinsky PM, Yancey SW, et al. Clinical markers of worseningasthma with the fluticasone propionate/salmeterol 100/50mcg Diskus(R) (FSC) vs fluticasone propionate (FP) 250 mcgalone in patients requiring FP 250 mcg BID for asthma stability[Abstract]. Chest 2003;124(4):88S.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOppenheimer J, Staufer J, Waitkus-Edwards K, Yancey S,Prillaman B, Sutton L, et al. 'Stepping down' from fluticasonepropionate/salmeterol 100/50mcg diskus results in loss ofasthma control [Abstract]. American Thoracic Society 100thInternational Conference. 2004:A37 Poster J94.Fardon TC, Haggart K, Lee DKC, Lipworth BJ. Stepping downinhaled corticosteroids in severe asthma with long actingbronchodilators utilising efort dependent and independentmeasures of pulmonary function [Abstract]. American ThoracicSociety 2005 International Conference. 2005:[B35] [Poster: G3].Fardon T, Haggart K, Lee DKC, Lipworth BJ. A proof of conceptstudy to evaluate stepping down the dose of fluticasonein combination with salmeterol and tiotropium in severepersistent asthma. Respiratory Medicine 2007;101(6):1218-28.FitzGerald JM, Sears MR, Boulet LP, Becker AB, McIvor AR,Ernst P, et al. Adjustable maintenance dosing with budesonide/formoterol reduces asthma exacerbations compared withtraditional fixed dosing: a five-month multicentre Canadianstudy. Canadian Respiratory Journal 2003;10(8):427-34.FitzGerland JM, Sears MR, Boulet LP, Becker AB, Boulet L-P,Becker AB. Erratum: Adjustable maintenance dosing withbudesonide/formoterol reduces asthma exacerbationscompared with traditional fixed dosing: a five monthmulticentre Canadian study [Canadian Respiratory Journal(2003) vol. 10 (8) (427-434)]. Canadian Respiratory Journal2004;11(1):20.FitzGerald JM, Boulet LP, Follows RMA. The CONCEPT trial:a 1-year, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy comparison of a stable dosing regimen of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate with an adjustable maintenance dosingregimen of formoterol/ budesonide in adults with persistentasthma. Clinical Therapeutics 2005;27(4):393-406.
Price DB, Williams AE, Yoxall S. Salmeterol/fluticasone stable-dose treatment compared with formoterol/budesonideadjustable maintenance dosing: impact on health-relatedquality of life. Respiratory Research 2007;8:46.FLIQ96 2005 {published data only}FLIQ96 GlaxoSmithKline. Efect of fourteen weeks treatmentwith fluticasone propionate step-down dosing from 1000mcg/day in comparison with a fixed dose of 200mcg/day followedby an open phase with placebo administered for 8 weeks insubjects with mild asthma who exacerbate during treatmentwith beta-2 agonist (prn). GlaxoSmithKline Clinical StudyRegister 2005.Fowler 2002 {published data only}Fowler S, Currie GP, Lipworth BJ. Step down therapy for asthmawith inhaled steroids alone or in combination with a longacting beta2 agonist [Abstract]. Journal of Allergy, Asthma andImmunolgy 2002;109(Suppl 1):Abstract No: 745.Haggart 2004 {published data only}Haggart K, Fardon TC, Lee DKC, Lipworth BJ. Steppingdown inhaled steroids in severe asthma with long actingbronchodilators: utilising efort dependent and independentmeasures of pulmonary function [Abstract]. Thorax2004;59(Suppl II):ii72.Hamada 2008 {published data only}
Hamada K, Yasuba H, Tanimura K, Hiramatu M, Kobayashi Y,Kita H. How can we stop ICS? Risk control therapy by as neededinhaled fluticasone afer stepping down [Abstract]. Journal ofAllergy and Clinical Immunology. 2008; Vol. 121:S219 [844].Kardos P, Bruggenjurgen B, Martin A, Meyer-Sabellek W,Richter K, Vogelmeier C, et al. Treatment of bronchial asthmausing a new adjustable combination treatment plan: AsthmaControl Plan (ATACO) [German]. Pneumologie 2001;55(5):253-7.Kawagishi 2000 {published data only}Kawagishi Y, Oosaki R, Kashii T, Kawasaki A, Fujishita T, Arai N, etal. Long-term prognosis of asthmatic patients treated with low-dose beclomethasone dipropionate. Arerugi 2000;49(5):391-6.Keonig 2004 {published data only}Keonig S, Waitkus-Edwards K, Yancey S, Prillman B, Dorinsky P,Prillaman B. Loss of asthma control when patients receivingfluticasone propionate/salmeterol 100/50 ug Diskus are"stepped-down" to fluticasone propionate, salmeterol ormontelukast alone [Abstract]. Journal of Allergy and ClinicalImmunology. 2004; Vol. 113:S94.Massanari 2008 {published data only}Massanari M, Jimenez P, Kianifard F, Maykut R, Zeldin R.The omalizumab associated decrease in peripheral bloodeosinophils in moderate severe IgE mediated asthma issustained following inhaled steroid dose reduction [Abstract].American Thoracic Society International Conference. 2008:A105.
McKinlay 2011 {published data only}McKinlay L, Williamson PA, Short PM, Fardon TC, Lipworth BJ.Proof of concept study to evaluate step-down therapy withinhaled corticosteroid alone or additive therapy on surrogateinflammatory markers in asthma. British Journal of ClinicalPharmacology 2011;71(1):128-31.Mikloweit 2000 {published data only}Mikloweit P, Zachgo W, Hader S, Reiss Plagemann C, Grimm A,Drews G. Lung function before and 12 weeks afer switching to areduced dose of HFA-beclomethasone dipropionate. AmericanJournal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 2000;161(3Suppl):A186.Obase 2013 {published data only}Obase Y, Ikeda M, Kurose K, Abe M, Shimizu H, Ohue Y, et al.Step-down of budesonide/formoterol in early stages of asthmatreatment leads to insuficient anti-inflammatory efect. Journalof Asthma 2013;50(7):718-21.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsPaggiaro 2011 {published data only}Paggiaro P, Nicolini G, Crimi N, Fabbri L, Olivieri D, Rossi A, etal. Six months step down treatment from high dose ICS/LABAcombination therapy in asthma [Abstract]. American Journal ofRespiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 2011; Vol. 183:A1278.Paggiaro P, Nicolini G, Crimi N, Fabbri LM, Olivieri D, Rossi A,et al. Asthma control and lung function afer step down fromhigh dose ICS/LABA combination therapy [Abstract]. EuropeanRespiratory Society Annual Congress. 2011; Vol. 38:722s[P3967].Reddel 2007 {published data only}Reddel HK, Peyters MJ, Wark PA, Sand IB, Jenkins CR.Comparison of the eficacy of seretide and flixotide when down-titrating the inhaled corticosteroid dose [Abstract]. Respirology.(Carlton, Vic.), 2007; Vol. 12:A40.
Rumbak 1998 {published data only}Rumbak M, Self T, Kelso T, Eberle L, Abou-Shala N, Learned S,et al. Moderate to high dose inhaled corticosteroids in adultasthmatics: does salmeterol facilitate step down therapy?[Abstract]. European Respiratory Journal. 1998; Vol. 12:19s,P157.Schmier 2003 {published data only}Schmier J, Leidy NK, Gower R. Reduction in oral corticosteroiduse with mometasone furoate dry powder inhaler improveshealth-related quality of life in patients with severe persistentasthma. Journal of Asthma 2003;40(4):383-93.Shamsul 2007 {published data only}Shamsul AI, Hadzri HM, Noradina AT, Fauzi MA, Hamid AJ,Rosalina AM, et al. Step-down approach in chronic stableasthma; a comparison of reducing dose inhaled formoterol/budesonide with maintaining inhaled budesonide [Abstract].Respirology. (Carlton, Vic.), 2007; Vol. 12:A141.Stallberg 2003 {published data only}Stallberg B, Olsson P, Jorgensen LA, Lindarck N, Ekstrom T.Budesonide/formoterol adjustable maintenance dosing reducesasthma exacerbations versus fixed dosing. International Journalof Clinical Practice 2003;57(8):656-61.
 Additional referencesAdams NP, Bestall JB, Malouf R, Lasserson TJ, Jones PW.Beclomethasone versus placebo for chronic asthma.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 1. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD002738]Adams N, Bestall J, Lasserson TJ, Jones PW, Cates CJ.Fluticasone versus placebo for chronic asthma in adults andchildren. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue4. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003135.pub4]Ahmad S. Stopping long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA) foradults with asthma well controlled by LABA and inhaledcorticosteroids. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2015,Issue 6. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011306.pub2]Bateman ED, Boushey HA, Bousquet J, Busse WW, Clark TJ,Pauwels RA, et al. Can guideline-defined asthma controlbe achieved? The Gaining Optimal Asthma ControL study.American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine2004;170:836-44.Bateman ED, Hurd SS, Barnes PJ, Bousquet J, Drazen JM,FitzGerald M, et al. Global strategy for asthma management andprevention: GINA executive summary. European RespiratoryJournal 2008;31(1):143-78.Colice GL. New developments in inhaled corticosteroids. Allergyand Asthma Proceedings 2006;27(5):332-40.Custovic A, Simpson A. The role of inhalant allergens in allergicairways disease. Journal of Investigational Allergology andClinical Immunology 2012;22(6):393-401.
Ducharme FM, Ni Chroinin M, Greenstone I, Lasserson, TJ.Addition of long-acting beta2-agonists to inhaled steroidsversus higher dose inhaled steroids in adults and children withpersistent asthma. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews2010, Issue 4. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005533.pub2]Fisseler-Eckhof 2011Fisseler-Eckhof A, Bartsch H, Zinsky R, Schirren J.Environmental isocyanate-induced asthma: morphologic andpathogenetic aspects of an increasing occupational disease.International Journal of Environmental Research and PublicHealth 2011;8(12):3672-87.Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA). From the GlobalStrategy for Asthma Management and Prevention, 2016.www.ginasthma.org (accessed 19 October 2016).Gionfriddo 2015Gionfriddo MR, Hagan JB, Hagan CR, Volcheck GW, Castaneda-Guarderas A, Rank MA. Stepping down inhaled corticosteroidsfrom scheduled to as needed in stable asthma: systematicreview and meta-analysis. Allergy and Asthma Proceedings2015;36(4):262-7.Global Asthma Network 2014Global Asthma Network. The Global Asthma Report 2014.  Asthma_ Report_ 2014.pdf (accessed 16 April 2015).
Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsHagan JB, Samant SA, Volcheck GW, Li JT, Hagan CR, Erwin PJ,et al. The risk of asthma exacerbation afer reducing inhaledcorticosteroids: a systematic review and meta-analysis ofrandomized controlled trials. Allergy 2014;69(4):510-6.Higgins JPT, Green S (editors). Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0 [updatedMarch 2011]. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. www.cochrane-handbook.org.Jaakkola JJ, Knight TL. The role of exposure to phthalates frompolyvinyl chloride products in the development of asthma andallergies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. EnvironmentalHealth Perspectives 2008;116(7):845-53.
Juniper EF, Kline PA, Vanzieleghemt MA, Ramsdale EH,O'Byrnett PM, Hargreave FE. Long-term efects of budesonideon airway responsiveness and clinical asthma severity ininhaled steroid-dependent asthmatics. European RespiratoryJournal 1990;3:1122-7.Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, Grifith LE. Measuring qualityof life in asthma. American Review of Respiratory Disease1993;147:832-8.Kew KM, Karner C, Mindus SM, Ferrara G. Combinationformoterol and budesonide as maintenance and relievertherapy versus combination inhaler maintenancefor chronic asthma in adults and children. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 12. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD009019.pub2]Kew KM, Beggs S, Ahmad S. Stopping long-actingbeta2-agonists (LABA) for children with asthma wellcontrolled on LABA and inhaled corticosteroids. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 5. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD011316.pub2]Lipworth BJ, McDevitt DG. Inhaled 2-adrenoceptor agonistsin asthma: help or hindrance?. British Journal of ClinicalPharmacology 1992;33:129-38.Lipworth BJ. Systemic adverse efects of inhaled corticosteroidtherapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives ofInternal Medicine 1999;159(9):941-55.National Health Service. Respiratory National ChartsNHS Business Services Authority. October 2013.  Oct_ 2013_ National.pdf(accessed 14 April 2015).Partridge 2006
Partridge MR, van der Molen T, Myrseth SE, Busse WW. Attitudesand actions of asthma patients on regular maintenancetherapy: the INSPIRE study. BMC Pulmonary Medicine2006;6(13):1-9.Pearce N, Pekkanen J, Beasley R. How much asthma is reallyattributable to atopy?. Thorax 1999;54(3):268-72.Review Manager 2014 [Computer program]The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration.Review Manager (RevMan). Version 5.3. Copenhagen: TheNordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014.Rimmington 1997Rimmington LD, Aronofsky L, Mowatt A, Wharburton E,Ryland I, Pearson MG. Use of a simple patient focused asthmamorbidity score. European Respiratory Journal 1997;11:1289.Rogers L, Reibman J. Stepping down asthma treatment:how and when. Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine2012;18(1):70-5.Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network/British ThoracicSociety. British guideline on the management of asthma. Anational clinical guideline. Edinburgh/London: SIGN/BTS, 2016.[ISBN 978 1 909103 47 4]Tse CS, Bernstein IL. Corticosteroid aerosols in the treatment ofasthma. Pharmacotherapy 1984;4(6):334-42.World Health Organization. Adolescents: health risks andsolutions. Fact sheet Ndeg345. Updated May 2014.  (accessed on10 June 2015).Xepapadaki 2009Xepapadaki P, Manios Y, Liarigkovinos T, Grammatikaki E,Douladiris N, Kortsalioudaki C, et al. Association of passiveexposure of pregnant women to environmental tobacco smokewith asthma symptoms in children. Pediatric Allergy andImmunology 2009;20:423-9. C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E SCharacteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID] Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews'Run-in' period: 8 weeks. All participants received salmeterol/fluticasone propionate combination(SFC) at a dose of 50/250 mg twice daily.Number of study centres and locations: 124 centres (no locations specified)ParticipantsEnrolled (N): 603Withdrawals (n): 63Severity of condition: well controlled on step 2 or 3. Mean % predicted prebronchodilator FEV1 (SD) asfollows: SFC 50/250, 87.8 (18.2); SFC 50/100, 91.2 (17.8); FP 250, 90.8 (17.2)Diagnostic criteria: Asthma control was assessed using the GOAL definitions of 'well controlled' and'total control'.Baseline lung function (mean morning PEF (SD), L/min): SFC 50/250, 465.6 (113.2); SFC 50/100, 467.9(111.2); FP 250, 463.7 (105.1)Smoking history, % smokers or ex-smokers: SFC 50/250, 24.7; SFC 50/100, 21.3; FP 250, 16.2Inclusion criteria: aged >=18 years; documented history of asthma (>= 6 months) well controlled withcurrent treatment (ICS at a dose of CFC beclomethasone dipropionate or equivalent and a long-actingbeta2-agonist at recommended dose) at a stable dose for >= 4 weeks before initial clinic visit (V1); respi-ratory tract infection, with acute exacerbation requiring emergency department treatment/hospitalisa-tion or use of oral/parenteral steroids, within 4 weeks of V1; any change in asthma maintenance treat-ment within 4 weeksExclusion criteria: smoking history >= 10 pack-years; respiratory tract infectionDetails of criteria for stepping down treatment: All participants received SFC 50/250 mg twice dailyand were randomised to remain on SFC 50/250 or move to 1 of the 2 step-down treatment arms if theirasthma was assessed as 'well controlled' over the last 2 weeks of the run-in period; asthma control wasassessed according to GOAL definitions (see Bateman 2004).Intervention 2: FP 250 mg twice daily (not relevant to review)
Comparison: SFC 50/250 mg twice dailyConcomitant medications: Short-acting bronchodilators (previously used as rescue medication) andantihistamines were permitted, provided they had been used for at least 4 weeks.Excluded medications: All previous asthma medications were discontinued at entry into the run-in pe-riod, except short-acting bronchodilators (previously used as rescue medication) and antihistamines,provided they had been used for at least 4 weeks.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOutcomesPrimary outcomes: mean morning PEF over the first 12 weeks of randomised treatmentNotable conflicts of interest of trial authors: Three of the trial authors had received sponsorship andhad attended advisory boards for various pharmaceutical companies, including AstraZeneca, Glax-oSmithKline and Boehringer-Ingelheim; 3 authors are employees of GlaxoSmithKline.Unclear riskInsufficient information providedLow riskStudy reported as double blind
Low riskData provided for all randomised individuals. We note that study authors re-ported lung function results only for the per-protocol population, whereasthey reported all other outcomes for the intent-to-treat population.High riskStudy authors reported the primary outcome for the per-protocol data set onthe basis that this is a non-inferiority study. Furthermore, the primary outcomeconsiders lung function only over the first 12 weeks of treatment; a secondaryoutcome assessed lung function in the full analysis set but considered only thesecond 12 weeks of treatment. All in all, findings were quite confusing and in-consistent. This trial was not reported as registered, and we cannot source aprotocol.Other biasHigh riskThe protocol suggests that only participants whose condition was well con-trolled within the last 2 weeks of the run-in period would go on to randomi-sation; however, it appears that a relatively high proportion of participantswhose asthma was not controlled were included in the full analysis set. Resultsof this study are not well reported, and as the study does not appear to havebeen prospectively registered, and a protocol was not cited, it is difficult to as-certain whether selective outcome reporting occurred. Study sponsorship isnot reported, although several authors worked for GSK. Key exclusion criteriaof poor control according to ACQ were not defined or reported. A large propor-tion of poorly controlled randomised participants were not included in the pri-mary outcome analysis (but were included in the secondary outcome analy-sis). Reporting was confusing.Godard 2008  (Continued)  Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsTotal duration of study: 2-week run-in period; 12-week treatment period'Run-in' period: 2-week run in period, during which participants remained on their existing doses ofICS ('high-dose' budesonide 400 mg twice daily, beclomethasone 400 mg twice daily or beclomethasone500 mg twice daily via a pMDI with a spacer; or 'low-dose' budesonide or beclomethasone 200 mg twicedaily)Withdrawals: 147/631 (23%) randomised participants withdrew during the treatment periodDate of study: not statedParticipantsN: 631 patients were randomised after a 2-week run-in period.Mean age (range), years: budesonide OD: 44.1 (16.5-80.2); budesonide BID: 45.7 (16.7-77.0); no ICSdose change: 40.9 (16.2-80.2)
Gender M/F, n: budesonide OD: 100/128; budesonide BID: 90/101; no ICS dose change: 100/112Severity of condition: baseline mean morning PEFR (SD), L/min: controlled on step 2. BudesonideOD: 437.2 (106.5); budesonide BID: 447.4 (111.3); no ICS dose change: 445.8 (100.9)Diagnostic criteria: mild, well controlledBaseline lung function - mean morning PEFR (SD), L/min: budesonide OD: 437.2 (106.5); budesonideBID: 447.4 (111.3); no ICS dose change: 445.8 (100.9)Smoking history: not statedInclusion criteria: aged >= 16 years; documented diagnosis of asthma (currently stable); asthma consid-ered by physician to be well controlled (as per BTS guidelines); receiving 200 mg twice daily (low dose)or 400/500 mg twice daily (high dose) budesonide or beclomethasone (via a pMDI +- spacer) for 6 monthsbefore entry; patients on the higher dose of steroid were required to have used a large volume spacerfor a minimum of 4 weeks before entryExclusion criteria: pregnant, at risk of pregnancy, breast feeding, brittle asthma, night shif workers.Within 3 months: any increase in total daily inhaled steroid dose; exacerbation resulting in hospitali-sation or requiring nebulisation, oral/injectable/rectal steroids, beta blockers, sodium cromoglycate,sodium nedocromil, any unlicensed medication or fluticasone propionate. Within 1 week before thestudy: Patients were not permitted to have taken theophylline (or derivatives), any long-acting bron-chodilators, ipratropium/oxitropium bromide or ketotifen.Details of criteria for stepping-down treatment: Participants were eligible for randomisation if theirdiary cards showed that they had no nocturnal wakening due to asthma in the previous 7 nights, and ifthey fulfilled 3 of the following criteria:
asthma symptoms of no more than mild severity experienced on 3 or fewer days of the previous 7 days;using <= 1 puf per day of inhaled bronchodilator on a maximum of 5 of the last 7 days; circadian varia-tion in PEFR < 20% in the previous 7 days; morning PEFR >= 80% or predicted or best (if this value wasgreater than predicted) on 5 of the 7 previous daysInterventionsIntervention: Participants on an initial high dose of ICS (budesonide 400 mg twice daily or beclometha-sone 400 mg twice daily or beclomethasone 500 mg twice daily delivered via a pMDI and a spacer de-vice) were randomised to receive budesonide 200 mg twice daily via a turbuhaler or 400 mg once daily(i.e. both groups represent a halving of the initial ICS dose). Participants on an initial low dose of ICS(budesonide or beclomethasone 200 mg twice daily) were randomised to receive budesonide 100 mgtwice daily via a turbuhaler or 200 mg once daily (i.e. both groups represent a halving of the initial ICSdose).Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsComparison: No change in initial dose of budesonide or beclomethasone.
Concomitant medications: Each patient was given terbutaline (Bricanyl) turbuhaler 500 mg prn for res-cue mediation during the run-in and throughout the study.OutcomesPrimary outcomes: morning PEFR recorded by diary cards (recorded at baseline, and at 4, 8 and 12weeks)Secondary outcomes: evening PEFR, proportion of symptom-free days/nights, proportion of beta2-ag-onist-free days/nights, sleep disturbance (all recorded via diary cards) quality of life (Juniper AsthmaQuality of Life Questionnaire (Juniper 1993); PEFR measured at clinic visits; asthma severity measuredat clinic visits; asthma control)Notable conflicts of interest of trial authors: not stated. One study author was an employee of AstraPharmaceuticals.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesBlinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomesIncomplete outcome data(attrition bias) All outcomesLow riskIncomplete primary outcome data were reported, but the number of partici-pants for whom data were missing was similar across OD/BD/pMDI groups.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)High riskNo study protocol available. The data for high-dose and low-dose groups werepooled and were not presented individually. Study authors stated that sepa-rate data were not presented individually because no significant differencesbetween the 2 dose groups were found for any of the analyses performed.
Other biasUnclear riskUnclear risk of bias: This is a complicated study, and some changes in inhalerdevice appear to have occurred at the same time as changes in dose. Partic-ipants entered the run-in period on their existing dose of ICS ('high' or 'low')and were later randomised to remain on their existing dose, or step down tohalf the dose in 1 of 2 different formats (half the dose twice daily, or the samedose but only once daily). No data were reported for the run-in period.Unclear risk of bias: Funding for the study is not reported. The paper has in-dustry authors, and the company manufactures products that seem to matchthe products reported upon. Funding for the study is not declared, but onestudy author is employed by Astra.Gunn 1997  (Continued)Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews  Total duration of study: 1 year'Run-in' period: 1 monthWithdrawals: 24/130 participants in the stepdown group and 22/129 in the control group discontinuedthe intervention. Analyses were performed on all randomised participants.Date of study: The study was performed between May 1999 and October 2001.ParticipantsN: 259 participants were randomised.Mean age (SD), years: step-down 52.8, (14.5); control 55 (15.2)Age range: 18-86 years
Gender (M/F), n: step-down, 54/76; control, 54/75Severity of condition: controlled on high-dose ICS (at least 1000 mg BDP) plus possibly other drugs(steps 2-4)Baseline lung function - % predicted pre-salbutamol FEV1 (SD), L/min: step-down, 80.3 (19.2); con-trol, 80.1 (18.6)Smoking history - current/former/never, n: step-down, 16/44/70; control, 17/49/63Inclusion criteria: aged >= 18 years; diagnosis of asthma >= 1 year; treated with >= 800 mg inhaled BDP (orbudesonide or fluticasone propionate at equivalent dosage)Exclusion criteria: required oral corticosteroids or attended general practice or hospital within 2months; inability to use peak flow meter; treatment with immunosuppressive drugs; serious illness; al-cohol, substance or drug misuse; pregnancy; participation in other research within the past 6 monthsDetails of criteria for stepping down treatment: stable asthma (i.e. good control) assessed at end ofrun-in period and at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. Good control was defined as an asthma morbidity score <= 2,no visits to general practice or hospital since previous visit and peak flow >= target flow on 8 of the previ-ous 14 days; if peak flow data were missing, the first two criteria were used.InterventionsIntervention: step-down - 50% reduction in ICS dose
Comparison: no change in ICS doseConcomitant medications: Reliever inhalers were permitted. 36.9% of the step-down group and30.2% of the control group were receiving a concomitant LABA.Excluded medications: immunosuppresive drugsOutcomesPrimary outcomes: proportion of participants experiencing an asthma exacerbation, asthma control(short asthma morbidity score (Rimmington 1997); scores ranged from 0 (perfect control) to 8 (verypoor control))Secondary outcomes: adverse events, health-related quality of life (EuroQoL and St George's Respira-tory Questionnaire), annual corticosteroid doseNotesFunding for trial: NHS R&D Programme on Asthma ManagementStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsNotable conflicts of interest of trial authors: Study authors had received funding, and various phar-maceutical companies including GlaxoSmithKline provided the study inhalers.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Low riskWell-described randomisation with computer-generated randomisation strati-fied by centre
Allocation concealment(selection bias)Low riskComputer-allocated randomisation sequence; randomisation code withheldfrom investigators until study completionBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesLow riskParticipants and personnel were blinded to treatment allocation via use ofidentical inhaler packs.Blinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomesLow riskRandomisation code was maintained blind until the end of the study.Incomplete outcome data(attrition bias) All outcomesLow riskPrimary outcome data were reported for all participants as intention to treat.Some data for health status secondary outcome measures were missing (notexplained), but the number of participants for whom data were missing wassimilar in both treatment groups. Lung function was not reported during or atthe end of the treatment period.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)High riskProtocol was not available. It is not clear why study authors did not presentlung function as, according to the Methods section, participants did monitorlung function for 2 weeks before each visit. Detailed adverse event data werenot presented.Other biasLow riskStudy medication was provided by industry, but study was funded by NHS R&Dprogramme on asthma development. No industry was involved in authorshipof the paper.Hawkins 2003  (Continued)  MethodsStudy design: randomised controlled trial, double-blind, parallel groupTotal duration of study: 3 months'Run-in' period: no run-in (this is a follow-up extension to a previous study)
Number of study centres and locations: Firestone Regional Chest and Allergy Clinic at St Joseph'sHospital and the McMaster University Medical Centre in Hamilton, CanadaStudy setting: secondary care (asthma clinic)Withdrawals: All 28 participants completed the studyDate of study: not reportedParticipantsN: 28. A subgroup of 14 participants were relevant to this review.Mean age: not reported. Mean age in parent study was ~ 42 years (Juniper 1990).Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsGender: not reportedSeverity of condition: controlled on step 2 (mild to moderate: approximately half of participants were'steroid dependent')Baseline lung function: Individual participant data were reported. At entry to initial study, all partic-ipants had airway hyper-responsiveness to methacholine (PC20 < 8.0 mg/mL) and symptomatic asth-ma.Inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria: successful completion of previous studyDetails of criteria for step-down treatment: not reported
InterventionsIntervention: a halving of the budesonide dose in steroid-dependent participants (n = 6)Comparison: no change in budesonide dose among steroid-dependent participants (n = 8)Concomitant medications: Bronchodilator medication was permitted (long-acting vs short-acting notspecified).Excluded medications: not reportedOutcomesPrimary outcomes: airway responsiveness to methacholine (measured with a standardised tidalbreathing protocol); clinical asthma severity (i.e. asthma control assessed via asthma severity ques-tionnaire). The questionnaire comprised 6 items: awakened at night by symptoms; awakened in themorning by symptoms; limitation of normal daily activities; sputum; use of bronchodilator more than4 times per day; FEV1 prebronchodilator < 70% predicted (One point was scored for each of the first5 items that had been positive on >= 1 day during the previous week; 1 point was scored for reducedspirometry; therefore, the maximum asthma severity score (i.e. worst control) was 6).Secondary outcomes: bronchodilator use; allergen exposure score; upper respiratory tract infectionscoreNotesFunding for trial: Funding was not reported.Notable conflicts of interest of trial authors: Conflicts of interest were not reported.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesBlinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomes
Low riskThe study was reported as double-blind.Incomplete outcome data(attrition bias) All outcomesLow riskAll 28 randomised participants completed the study, and it appears that datawere reported for all 28 participants.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsSelective reporting (re-porting bias)High riskStudy authors state, "During analysis, it was found that all the outcomes inthe two reduction groups were very similar, and also, the outcomes in the twogroups in whom steroids were not reduced were very similar. Therefore, forsimplicity, the data have been combined and are presented as two groups, re-duced and maintained".No protocol was available; no prespecified analysis plan was prepared. Groupdata were combined as described above.Juniper 1991  (Continued)  Number of study centres and locations: 16 centres (8 each in UK and Belgium)Study setting: not statedWithdrawals: 5 participants (CIC 160 mg, n = 4; FP 250 mg, n = 1)
Date of study: October 2004 to July 2005ParticipantsN: 111 randomisedMean age, years: CIC 160 mg OD: 43; FP 250 mg BID: 46Gender M/F, n: CIC 160 mg OD: 28/30; FP 250 mg BID: 30/23Severity of condition: controlled on step 2Baseline lung function - mean (SD) FEV1, L: CIC 160 mg OD: 3.272 (0.869); FP 250 mg BID: 3.146 (0.823)Smoking history - non-smoker/ex-smoker/current smoker, n: CIC 160 mg OD: 38/18/2; FP 250 mg BID:34/18/1Inclusion criteria: male and female patients aged 17-75 years; diagnosis of asthma as defined byAmerican Thoracic Society guidelines for at least 6 months, but otherwise in good health; FEV1 >= 90%of predicted; maintained asthma control over previous 3 months using fluticasone propionate 250 mgtwice daily, or equivalent, with short-acting bronchodilator use as rescue medication onlyExclusion criteria: concomitant severe disease, such as a lower respiratory tract infection; chronic ob-structive pulmonary disease or other relevant lung diseases; more than 1 emergency care visit or hospi-talisation due to asthma exacerbations in the previous year; or clinically relevant abnormal laboratoryvalues suggesting anunknown disease. Other exclusion criteria were use of systemic glucocorticoids, long-acting b2-ago-nists,oral b2-agonists and sustained-release xanthines within 3 months before study entry; pregnancy andbreast-feeding amongfemale patients; and ex-smokers or current smokers with >= 10 pack-years.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInterventionsIntervention: ciclesonide 160 mg OD (i.e. ~ 50% reduction according to GINA 2016)Comparison: fluticasone propionate 250 mg BID (i.e. no change)
Concomitant medications: short-acting bronchodilator used as rescue medication onlyExcluded medications: See exclusion criteria.OutcomesPrimary outcomes: efficacy - percentage of days with asthma control (defined as days without asthmasymptoms and without rescue medication use); asthma symptom-free days; rescue medication-freedays; and nocturnal awakening-free days. Safety - adverse eventsSecondary outcomes: efficacy - FEV1; forced vital capacity (FVC); PEF from spirometry; PEF from par-ticipant diaries measured on a Mini-Wright PEF meter; asthma symptom scores from participant diaries(sum scores based on a 9-point scale, with 0 indicating no symptoms); use of rescue medication; num-ber of participants with an asthma exacerbation; and time to onset of the first asthma exacerbation.Safety - vital signs (blood pressure and pulse rate); standard laboratory tests (including haematology,blood chemistry and urinalysis); and number of participants with oral candidiasisNotesFunding for trial: This study was funded and sponsored by ALTANA Pharma AG, a member of the Ny-comed Group.Notable conflicts of interest of trial authors: Editorial assistance for preparation of the manuscriptwas provided by Nathan Price-Lloyd, PhD, Medicus International, which was funded by ALTANA PharmaAG, a member of the Nycomed Group. Study authors reported no conflicts of interest.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesBlinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomesLow riskThe study was reported as double-blind, double-dummy.Incomplete outcome data(attrition bias) All outcomes
Low riskIntention-to-treat analyses were performed for safety analyses and comprisedall randomised participants. Some data for lung function analyses were miss-ing, but only from 3 participants in the step-down group.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)Unclear riskProtocol was not available; however, the range of outcomes seems fairly com-prehensive.Other biasLow riskNone identifiedKnox 2007  (Continued)  MethodsStudy design: randomised controlled, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel groupStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsTotal duration of study: 14 weeksNumber of study centres and locations: 18 pulmonology practicesStudy setting: pulmonology outpatient practicesWithdrawals: none reported
Date of study: November 1996 to October 1997ParticipantsN: 150Mean (SD) age, years: 400 mg/day BDP: 43 (15); 1000 mg/day BDP: 42 (15)Age range: not reportedGender - M/F, n: 400 mg/day BDP: 22/50; 1000 mg/day BDP: 30/48Severity of condition: step 2Baseline lung function - mean (SE) FEV1, L: 400 mg/day BDP: 2.77 (0.09); 1000 mg/day BDP: 2.85 (0.09)Smoking history: not reportedInclusion criteria and exclusion criteria, allowable range: age 18-75 years; use of inhaled steroidsfor >= 3 months (BDP 1000 mg or BUD 800-1000 mg); use of b2-agonists on demand (>= 1 pufs/d); re-versible airflow obstruction assessed within the last 2 years; change in FEV >= 12%; change in PEF >= 20%;bronchial hyper-responsiveness to inhaled histamine (PC20 FEV1 >= 4 mg/mL); baseline FEV1 >= 60% ofpredicted; variability of baseline FEV1 during run-in period <= 15%Details of criteria for step-down treatment: Participants were randomised to step-down (for eligibili-ty, see inclusion and exclusion criteria).InterventionsIntervention: hydrofluoroalkane beclomethasone 400 mg/day (i.e. < 50% dose reduction)Comparison: chlorofluorocarbon beclomethasone 1000 mg/day.Concomitant medications: not reported; likely that use of short-acting bronchodilators as rescuemedication was permittedExcluded medications: none specifiedOutcomesPrimary outcomes: Efficacy - morning peak flow; Safety - adverse eventsSecondary outcomes: evening peak flow, FEV1, concentration of inhaled histamine causing a 20% de-cline in FEV1, frequency of b2-agonist use, daily asthma symptom score (0 represents no symptoms; 5represents severe symptoms); and sleep disturbance score. Safety - oropharyngeal candidiasis; report-ed hoarseness; clinical laboratory tests (i.e. haematology, serum chemistry, urine analysis); and vitalsigns (i.e. sitting pulse rate, blood pressure, ECG)
NotesFunding for trial: 3M Medica (Borken, Germany)Notable conflicts of interest of trial authors: not reported; however, several study authors were em-ployees of 3M MedicaRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedAllocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskInsufficient information providedBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesLow riskThe study was reported as double-blind.Blinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomes
Low riskThe study was reported as double-blind.Incomplete outcome data(attrition bias) All outcomesLow riskOutcome data appear complete. Data appear to be reported for all ran-domised participants.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)High riskProtocol was not available. Reporting of safety results appears to be fairly se-lective (SAEs not reported, details of individual AEs not reported).Other biasLow riskNone identifiedMagnussen 2000  (Continued)Abbreviations: BDP, beclomethasone dipropionate; BID, twice daily; BTS, British Thoracic Society; CFC, chlorofluorocarbon; CIC,ciclesonide; ECG, electrocardiogram; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FP, fluticasone propionate; FVC, forced vital capacity;GOAL, Gaining Optimal Asthma Control study; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, long-acting beta agonist; NHS, National Health Service;OD, once daily; PC20, provocative concentration that produces a 20% reduction in FEV1 from baseline value; PEF, peak expiratory flow;PEFR, peak expiratory flow rate; pMDI, pressurised metered-dose inhaler; QoL, quality of life; R&D, research and development; SD, standarddeviation; SE, standard error; SFC, salmeterol formoterol combination; UK, United Kingdom. Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID] Aalbers 2004Wrong interventionAdachi 2001Wrong patient populationALA 2007Wrong interventionAnonymous 1979Wrong interventionBaba 1999Wrong study designBaba 2000Wrong interventionBateman 2005Wrong comparator
Belda 2006Wrong study designBoulet 1990Wrong route of administrationBrambilla 1994Wrong comparatorStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudyReason for exclusionBritton 1997Wrong study designBruggenjurgen 2005Wrong interventionBusse 2003Wrong study designCampbell 1998Wrong interventionCasale 2003Wrong interventionChanez 2001Wrong interventionChiu 2011Wrong interventionChung 2002Wrong interventionDavies 1977Wrong interventionDorinsky 2003Wrong interventionFLIQ96 2005Wrong study designFowler 2002Wrong interventionHaggart 2004Wrong interventionHamada 2008Wrong study designKardos 2001Wrong interventionKawagishi 2000Wrong study designKeonig 2004Wrong interventionMassanari 2008Wrong interventionMcKinlay 2011Wrong interventionMikloweit 2000Wrong study designObase 2013Wrong interventionPaggiaro 2011Wrong comparatorReddel 2007Wrong intervention
Rumbak 1998Wrong interventionStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudyReason for exclusionSchmier 2003Wrong route of administrationShamsul 2007Wrong interventionStallberg 2003Wrong intervention  Comparison 1.   ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (no concomitant LABA)1 Exacerbation requiring OCS2261Odds Ratio (M-H, Random, 95% CI)1.86 [0.16, 21.09]2 Asthma control1 Mean Difference (IV, Random, 95%CI)3 All-cause SAEs2742Odds Ratio (M-H, Random, 95% CI)1.24 [0.25, 6.25]4 Steroid-related AEs2261Odds Ratio (M-H, Random, 95% CI)0.76 [0.16, 3.54]5 Juniper AQLQ score(change from baseline)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random, 95%CI)Totals not selected6 Lung function, PEFR morn-ing (L/min)3875Mean Difference (IV, Random, 95%CI)7 Lung function, FEV1 (L)2261Mean Difference (IV, Random, 95%CI)Magnussen 20000/720/78 Not estimable  Test for overall effect: Z=0.5(P=0.62)   Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.2.   Comparison 1 ICS dose reduction versus no changein ICS dose (no concomitant LABA), Outcome 2 Asthma control.
Study or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Tau2=0.09; Chi2=1.06, df=1(P=0.3); I2=5.29% Study or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Favours dose reduction1000.01100.11Favours no changeStudy or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CIFavours no change10.5-1-0.50Favours dose reduction  Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.6.   Comparison 1 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose(no concomitant LABA), Outcome 6 Lung function, PEFR morning (L/min).  Favours no change4020-40-200Favours dose reductionStudy or subgroupICS dose reductionNo changein ICS doseMean DifferenceWeightMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CI Random, 95% CI  Favours no change0.40.2-0.4-0.20Favours dose reductionOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size1 Exacerbation requiring OCS2569Odds Ratio (M-H, Random,95% CI)
2 Asthma control (short asthma mor-bidity score), change from baseline3 Asthma control (Asthma SeverityQuestionnaire)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-ed4 All-cause SAEs2569Odds Ratio (M-H, Random,95% CI)5 EuroQoL score (change from base-line)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-ed6 St. George's Respiratory Scale score(change from baseline)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-edStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOutcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size7 Lung function, PEFR morning (L/min) (change from baseline)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-ed8 Lung function, reduction in FEV1 (%predicted, change from baseline)1 Mean Difference (IV, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-ed9 Exacerbation requiring hospitalisa-tion2569Odds Ratio (M-H, Random,95% CI)10 Exacerbation requiring ED visit1 Odds Ratio (M-H, Random,95% CI)Totals not select-ed11 Mortality1310Odds Ratio (M-H, Random,95% CI)Study or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio
 n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Total events: 52 (ICS dose reduction), 42 (No change in ICS dose) Heterogeneity: Tau2=0; Chi2=0, df=1(P=0.94); I2=0% Favours dose reduction50.220.51Favours no changeStudy or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CI  Analysis 2.3.   Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose(concomitant LABA), Outcome 3 Asthma control (Asthma Severity Questionnaire).Study or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CIFavours dose reduction21-2-10Favours no changeStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudy or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Total events: 7 (ICS dose reduction), 10 (No change in ICS dose) Heterogeneity: Tau2=0.72; Chi2=1.55, df=1(P=0.21); I2=35.5% Favours dose reduction2000.005100.11Favours no changeStudy or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CI  Analysis 2.6.   Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitantLABA), Outcome 6 St. George's Respiratory Scale score (change from baseline).Study or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CIFavours dose reduction52.5-5-2.50Favours no change  Analysis 2.7.   Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitantLABA), Outcome 7 Lung function, PEFR morning (L/min) (change from baseline).Study or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseMean DifferenceMean Difference
 NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CIFavours no change105-10-50Favours dose reduction  Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 2.8.   Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus no change in ICS dose (concomitantLABA), Outcome 8 Lung function, reduction in FEV1 (% predicted, change from baseline).Study or subgroupExperimentalControlMean DifferenceMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Random, 95% CIRandom, 95% CIFavours maintenance2010-20-100Favours reduced doseStudy or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Z=1.25(P=0.21) Favours dose reduction1000.01100.11Favours no changeStudy or subgroupICS dose reductionNo change in ICS doseOdds RatioOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CIM-H, Random, 95% CIFavours dose reduction1000.01100.11Favours no change  Analysis 2.11.   Comparison 2 ICS dose reduction versus nochange in ICS dose (concomitant LABA), Outcome 11 Mortality.Study or subgroupICS dosereductionNo changein ICS doseOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CI  Total (95% CI)156154Not estimableHeterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Not applicable 
Favours [ICS dose reduction]1000.01100.11Favours [No change]  Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsA P P E N D I C E SAppendix 1. Sources and search methods for the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register DatabaseFrequency of searchCENTRAL (the Cochrane Library)MonthlyMEDLINE (Ovid)WeeklyEmbase (Ovid)WeeklyPsycINFO (Ovid)MonthlyCINAHL (EBSCO)MonthlyAMED (EBSCO)Monthly  ConferenceYears searchedAmerican Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI)2001 onwardsAmerican Thoracic Society (ATS)2001 onwardsAsia Pacific Society of Respirology (APSR)2004 onwardsBritish Thoracic Society Winter Meeting (BTS)2000 onwardsChest Meeting2003 onwardsEuropean Respiratory Society (ERS)1992, 1994, 2000 onwardsInternational Primary Care Respiratory Group Congress (IPCRG)2002 onwardsThoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand (TSANZ)1999 onwards Asthma search1. exp Asthma/
2. asthma$.mp.3. (antiasthma$ or anti-asthma$).mp.4. Respiratory Sounds/5. wheez$.mp.Stepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews6. Bronchial Spasm/7. bronchospas$.mp.8. (bronch$ adj3 spasm$).mp.9. bronchoconstrict$.mp.10. exp Bronchoconstriction/11. (bronch$ adj3 constrict$).mp.12. Bronchial Hyperreactivity/13. Respiratory Hypersensitivity/14. ((bronchial$ or respiratory or airway$ or lung$) adj3 (hypersensitiv$ or hyperreactiv$ or allerg$ or insuficiency)).mp.15. ((dust or mite$) adj3 (allerg$ or hypersensitiv$)).mp.Filter to identify RCTs1. exp "clinical trial [publication type]"/2. (randomised or randomised).ab,ti.3. placebo.ab,ti.4. dt.fs.5. randomly.ab,ti.6. trial.ab,ti.7. groups.ab,ti.9. Animals/10. Humans/11. 9 not (9 and 10)The MEDLINE strategy and the RCT filter are adapted to identify trials in other electronic databases.Appendix 2. Search strategy to identify relevant trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register
#1 AST:MISC1#2 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Asthma Explode All#3 asthma*:ti,ab#4 #1 or #2 or #3#5 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Adrenal Cortex Hormones Explode All#6 (steroid* or corticosteroid* or glucocorticosteroid* or glucocorticoid* or corticoid*) AND (inhal*)#7 ICS:ti,ab,kw#8 beclomethasone or beclometasone#9 budesonideStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews#10 fluticasone#11 ciclesonide#12 mometasone#13 flunisolide#14 triamcinolone#15 #5 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 or #12 or #13 or #14#16 step* NEAR3 down*#17 (reduc* or decreas*) NEAR3 (dose* or treatment* or therap*)#18 down* NEAR3 titrat*#19 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Drug Administration Schedule Explode All[Note: in search line #1, MISC1 denotes the field in which the reference has been coded for condition, in this case, asthma.]C O N T R I B U T I O N S   O F   A U T H O R SAll review authors contributed to drafing of the protocol, reviewed it critically for intellectual content, provided final approval of the versionto be published and are accountable for all aspects of the work.D E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S TIain Crossingham: none.Paul Marsden: received lecture fees and conference accommodation/fees from industry unrelated to the current review.Nathan Halcovitch: none.David Evans: provides freelance writing services to medical communication agencies.
S O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources*The authors declare that no funding was received for this systematic review, Other.External sources*IC, PM and NH declare that no funding was received for this systematic review, Other.*DE: National Institute for Health Research, UK.Evidence to guide care in adults and children with asthma, 13/89/14D I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E WWe used the mean diference instead of the standardised mean diference, as a combination of diferent scales would make clinicalinterpretation of the efect measure dificult.I N D E X   T E R M SMedical Subject Headings (MeSH)Adrenal Cortex Hormones  [*administration & dosage]  [adverse efects];  Anti-Asthmatic Agents  [*administration & dosage]  [adverseefects];  Asthma  [*drug therapy];  Forced Expiratory Volume;  Quality of Life;  Randomized Controlled Trials as TopicStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsMeSH check wordsAdolescent; Adult; Aged; Aged, 80 and over; Humans; Middle AgedStepping down the dose of inhaled corticosteroids for adults with asthma (Review)Copyright (c) 2017 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
