  CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................23Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1 Mortality, Outcome 1 Mortality...............................................................................................................28Analysis 2.1. Comparison 2 Serious adverse event time point closest to hospital discharge, Outcome 1 Serious adverse events....29Analysis 3.1. Comparison 3 Asthma symptom score, Outcome 1 Asthma symptom score in the acute phase...............................29Analysis 4.1. Comparison 4 Pneumonia, Outcome 1 Pneumonia......................................................................................................30CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................32DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................33SOURCES OF SUPPORT...............................................................................................................................................................................33DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................33i
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in childrenSteven Kwasi Korang1,2, Joshua Feinberg2, Jorn Wetterslev2, Janus C Jakobsen3,41Pediatric Department, Holbaek Sygehus, Holbaek, Denmark. 2Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical Intervention Research,Department 7812, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. 3The Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group,Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical Intervention Research, Department 7812, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital,Copenhagen, Denmark. 4Department of Cardiology, Holbaek Hospital, Holbaek, DenmarkContact address: Steven Kwasi Korang, Pediatric Department, Holbaek Sygehus, Smedelundsgade 60, Holbaek, 4300, 
Editorial group: Cochrane Airways Group.Publication status and date: New, published in Issue 9, 2016.Citation:  Korang SK, Feinberg J, Wetterslev J, Jakobsen JC. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016, Issue 9. Art. No.: CD012067. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012067.pub2.Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TAsthma is one of the most common reasons for hospital admission among children and constitutes a significant economic burden. Use ofnon-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) in the care of children with acute asthma has increased even though evidence supportingthe intervention has been considered weak and clinical guidelines do not recommend the intervention. NPPV might be an efectiveintervention for acute asthma, but no systematic review has been conducted to assess the efects of NPPV as an add-on therapy to usualcare in children with acute asthma.ObjectivesTo assess the benefits and harms of NPPV as an add-on therapy to usual care (e.g. bronchodilators and corticosteroids) in children withacute asthma.We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register (CAGR). The Register contains trial reports identified throughsystematic searches of bibliographic databases, including the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE,Embase, CINAHL, AMED and PsycINFO, and by handsearching of respiratory journals and meeting abstracts. We also conducted a searchof ClinicalTrials.gov (www.ClinicalTrials.gov) and the WHO trials portal (www.who.int/ictrp/en/). We searched all databases from theirinception to February 2016, with no restriction on language of publication.
Selection criteriaWe included randomised clinical trials (RCTs) assessing NPPV as add-on therapy to usual care versus usual care for children (age < 18 years)hospitalised for an acute asthma attack.Two review authors independently screened titles and abstracts. We retrieved all relevant full-text study reports, independently screenedthe full text, identified trials for inclusion and identified and recorded reasons for exclusion of ineligible trials. We resolved disagreementsthrough discussion or, if required, consulted a third review author. We recorded the selection process in suficient detail to complete aPRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) flow diagram and 'Characteristics of excluded studies' table.We identified the risk of bias of included studies to reduce the risk of systematic error. We contacted relevant study authors when datawere missing.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Main resultsWe included two RCTs that randomised 20 participants to NPPV and 20 participants to control. We assessed both studies as having highrisk of bias; both trials assessed efects of bilateral positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Neither trial used continuous positive airway pressure(CPAP). Controls received standard care. Investigators reported no deaths and no serious adverse events (Grades of Recommendation,Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE): very low quality of evidence due to serious risk of bias and serious imprecision ofresults). Both trials showed a statistically significant reduction in symptom score. One trial did not report a standard deviation (SD), but byusing an estimated SD, we found a statistically significantly reduced asthma symptom score (mean diference (MD) -2.50, 95% confidenceinterval (CI) -4.70 to -0.30, P = 0.03, 19 participants, GRADE: very low quality of evidence). In the other trial, NPPV was associated with alower total symptom score (5.6 vs 1.9, 16 participants, very low quality of evidence) before cross-over, but investigators did not report anSD, nor could it be estimated from the first phase of the trial, before the cross-over. These gains could be clinically relevant, as a reductionof three or more points in symptom score is considered a clinically meaningful change. Researchers documented five dropouts (12.5%),four of which were due to intolerance to NPPV, and one to respiratory failure requiring intubation. Owing to insuficient reporting in thelatter trial and use of diferent scoring systems, it was not possible to conduct a meta-analysis nor a Trial Sequential Analysis.Authors' conclusionsCurrent evidence does not permit confirmation or rejection of the efects of NPPV for acute asthma in children. Large RCTs with low riskof bias are warranted.
P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YReview questionWe reviewed available evidence on non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) for children with acute asthma.BackgroundAsthma is known to cause acute exacerbations, in which characteristic changes in the lungs predispose to respiratory dificulties and insome cases respiratory failure. This condition constitutes a significant economic burden and a major health issue worldwide. Evidencesupporting this intervention has been considered weak, and the intervention is not recommended in clinical guidelines. Nevertheless, useof NPPV in the care of children with acute asthma has increased, and NPPV might be an efective intervention for acute asthma. Until now,no systematic review has summed up all the evidence provided by randomised clinical trials.Study characteristicsThe evidence is current to August 2016. We included two trials, with 40 participants. Included trials assessed the efects of one type of NPPVcalled bilevel positive airway pressure, which lasted for two and 24 hours, respectively, in the two trials.Key results
Overall, we found that NPPV compared with no additional treatment, treatment as usual or placebo did not result in any benefit orharm regarding death from all causes, serious adverse events (i.e. major complications) or improvement in asthma symptoms. Five studyparticipants did not tolerate the treatment, four because of discomfort and one because intubation was required. Current evidence cannotconfirm or reject the efects of NPPV for treatment of children with acute asthma. Larger randomised clinical trials are warranted.The evidence behind our conclusions is of very low quality. The two studies had high risk of bias (i.e. the studies were conducted in a waythat may skew results to the positive side). In addition, the two studies included few participants, making results of this review imprecise.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings for the main comparison.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for children with acute asthmaPatient or population: children with acute asthmaSetting: hospitalIntervention: non-invasive ventilation as add-on therapy to standard careComparison: standard careAnticipated absolute effects* (95%CI)Risk with stan-dard careRisk with non-invasive venti-lation as add-ontherapy to stan-dard careRelative effect(95% CI)No. of partici-pants(studies)Quality of theevidence(GRADE)CommentsStudy populationMortality
No deaths were seen.Study populationSerious adverseeventsnot poolednot poolednot estimable35(2 RCTs)very low aNo serious adverse events were reportedAsthma symp-tom score atthe acute phasenot estimablenot pooled-35(2 RCTs)very low aBasnet 2012: Children in NPPV grouphad an improvement in their mean CASfrom 7 (median, 7; interquartile range,6 to 8) at baseline to 1.6 (median, 2; interquartilerange, 2 to 2.8) at 24 hours vs meanCAS from 6.9 (median, 7; interquartilerange, 6 to 8) to 4.1 (median, 3.5; interquartilerange, 3 to 5.5) in the standardgroup (P < 0.01)Thill 2004: NPPV wasassociated with lower total CAS (5.6 vs 1.9) beforecross-over and lowerscores for each individual component (accessorymuscle use, wheeze and dyspnoea;all P < 0.01)  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
  Study populationPneumoniavery low a *The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (andits 95% CI). CI: confidence interval; OR: odds ratio; RR: risk ratio.GRADE Working Group grades of evidence High quality: We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of effect.Moderate quality: We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of effect but may be substantially different.Low quality: Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of effect.Very low quality: We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect.aDowngraded by 4 levels because of very serious risk of bias and very serious imprecision of results. CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsB A C K G R O U N DThe prevalence of asthma in children around the world hasincreased in recent decades (Masoli 2004; AIHW 2010; Asher2014). Asthma afects approximately 334 million people globally(Asher 2014). The highest prevalence of asthma among children isseen in high-income countries (Asher 2014). Recent reviews haveconcluded that asthma is the most common chronic disease inchildren, and is among the top 10 chronic conditions in globalranking of disability-adjusted life-years during mid-childhood(Papadopoulos 2012; Asher 2014). In 2012, 14% of US children hadat some point been diagnosed with asthma, and 8.3% had asthmaduring the study period (Bloom 2013; CDC 2013).
Millions of patients worldwide continue to have suboptimalasthma control, possibly as the result of suboptimal treatment(Papadopoulos 2012). A serial, cross-sectional analysis revealedthat asthma seems to account for 2.3% of all hospitalisationsamong children (Hasegawa 2013). Data from the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC) indicate that annual rates ofemergency department treatment and hospitalisation have rangedfrom 7 to 9.5 and from 1.9 to 2.5 per 100 US children with asthma,respectively (Akinbami 2012). Current international mortality ratesfor children with asthma range from 0.0 to 0.7 per 100,000 children(Asher 2014). Great variance across countries is apparent, asdemonstrated, for example, by the higher Australian mortality ratefor asthma at 1.67 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.51 to 1.85) per100,000 population (AIHW 2010; Asher 2014). Several high-riskpopulations have been noted, as prevalence seems to be afectedby sex, ethnicity and socioeconomic status. In contrast to adults,predominance among males has been reported among children(Bloom 2013; Wade 2015). Children with a multiethnic backgroundseem to have the highest prevalence, at 14.1%, compared withchildren of Asian ethnicity, who had the lowest prevalence at 5.2%(Akinbami 2012). Prevalence is also higher among children of lowersocioeconomic status (Akinbami 2012; Bloom 2013).The efect of asthma on quality of life was investigated amongadults in a survey from 2010, on which the proportion of patientsthat rated their health as 'fair to poor' was 25% among adultswith asthma compared with 14% among people without asthma(AIHW 2010). Another survey suggests that the efect of asthma onquality of life is even more profound among children aged 12 to 17compared with adults, perhaps resulting from the need for greaterlimits on their daily activities and frequent absence from school(Alith 2015).
Description of the conditionAsthma is a chronic inflammatory respiratory condition that leadsto persistent remodelling of the small airways and bronchial hyper-responsiveness. This hyper-responsiveness is an immune responsethat asthmatic individuals display to certain stimuli that seem tohave little or no efect on individuals with normal airways (Bloemen2007; Kumar 2009). Hyper-responsiveness is seen as characteristicacute asthmatic exacerbations of reversible bronchoconstriction,dyspnoea, wheezing and coughing (Brannan 2012; Hedlin 2012;Liu 2014). The diagnosis is determined primarily by the history ofthe patient and the clinical presentation (Liu 2014). In youngerpaediatric patients, the diagnosis might, however, present achallenge, as several conditions among preschool children cancause an obstructive pattern, which in turn presents as asthma-like respiratory symptoms (e.g. wheeze, cough, shortness of breath)(Dijk 2013; Cave 2014; Mantzouranis 2014).During acute exacerbations of asthma, the lumen of the airwaysnarrows as a result of smooth muscle contraction in synergy withincreased mucus production and bronchial oedema (Kumar 2009).This narrowing of the lumen reduces airflow into and out of thelungs, potentially resulting in respiratory failure (Kumar 2009).Asthma is also known to cause air trapping, lung hyperinflationand atelectasis (partial collapse or incomplete inflation of the lung)as the result of mucus plugging and bronchoconstriction (Blanch2005; Finder 2014). The airway obstruction causes an increase inalveolar pressure, the so-called 'intrinsic positive end-expiratoryairway pressure (PEEPi)' (Pepe 1982; Blanch 2005; Caramez 2005;Tzoufi 2005; Graham 2007). This PEEPi is proportionately higherwhen airway obstruction becomes more severe (Aldrich 1993).
Although several genes have been associated with increasedrisk of asthma, the causes of asthma are not completelyunderstood (Bisgaard 2009; Mantzouranis 2014). It is known thatenvironmental exposure to allergens is essential for developmentof the sensitisation that is seen in asthma (Galli 2008; Hedlin 2012;Jackson 2012; Jobe 2014; Yoo 2014). This is exemplified by the factthat prevalence is higher among children living in rural areas thanin children from urban areas (Douwes 2002; Mantzouranis 2014).No curative treatment for asthma is known, although somechildren grow out of asthma (Papadopoulos 2012; GINA 2015).Conventional treatment depends on the severity of the condition.In an acute asthma attack/exacerbation, first-line pharmacologicaltreatment usually consists of bronchodilators (beta2-agonists) andcorticosteroids (Papadopoulos 2012; Sawicki 2014a; GINA 2015).Second-line agents such as ipratropium bromide (anticholinergicagent) and magnesium sulphate are recommended and used insome cases (GINA 2015; Scarfone 2015). Care in acute situationsmost ofen seeks to promote bronchodilation and antagonisethe mediators of inflammation and bronchoconstriction, therebyupholding suficient ventilation (NHLBI 2007). Long-term treatmentfocuses on prevention of asthma attacks. This is usually achievedwith inhalation of corticosteroids, strategies to avoid triggers andsmoking cessation, as well as use of long-acting beta2-agonistswhen warranted by the frequency of attacks (GINA 2015). Severalasthma severity scores have been created to assess the severityof acute asthma exacerbations among children (Chalut 2000;Ducharme 2008; Alnaji 2014; Sawicki 2014b).
Description of the interventionRespiratory support can be divided into invasive ventilation andnon-invasive ventilation (Pavone 2013). In invasive ventilation, airis given through an internal interface directly into the trachea(e.g. intubation, tracheostomy). In non-invasive ventilation, air isgiven through an external interface (e.g. facemask, nasal cannula)(Pavone 2013).Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsfrom the PEEPi described under Description of the condition andis sometimes referred to as an extrinsic intrinsic positive end-expiratory airway pressure (PEEPe) (Graham 2007).In CPAP, a single constant positive airway pressure is maintainedthroughout the respiratory cycle. Therefore, CPAP does not assistspontaneous inspiration of the patient (Boldrini 2012; Pavone2013). Instead, higher intraluminal pressures prevent collapsein the upper airways, thereby promoting alveolar recruitment(Pavone 2013). The consequent alveolar recruitment increasesfunctional residual capacity and counteracts the development ofatelectasis (Pavone 2013). Through this mechanism, CPAP aimsto improve oxygenation and reduce the workload for inspiratorymuscles, thereby reducing the work of breathing (Shivaram1987; Pavone 2013). A recent observational study suggested thatCPAP might provide a beneficial efect for children with acuteasthma by initiating autonomic modulation, thereby producing abronchodilator efect that may go beyond the mechanical efectdescribed previously (de Freitas 2013).Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP)
In BiPAP, pressure in inspiratory and expiratory phases of therespiratory cycle can be adjusted separately (Gupta 2010). WhenBiPAP is used, a positive expiratory airway pressure and aneven higher inspiratory positive airway pressure are inducedcompared with physiological breathing (Pavone 2013). BiPAPtherefore creates a diference between expiratory and inspiratoryphases, which is thought to support the spontaneous inspiratoryact of the patient (Gupta 2010; Pavone 2013).Both CPAP and BiPAP ofer the advantage that they can be appliedearlier and intermittently compared with invasive ventilation. NPPVmay be eficient enough to reverse an acute exacerbation soinvasive ventilation is avoided (Lim 2012). Several observationalstudies show a trend favouring NPPV for other causes of respiratoryfailure, including acute respiratory distress syndrome and acutelung injury (defined as acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure), aswell as acute hypercapnic respiratory failure such as chronicobstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma (Brochard 2002;Keenan 2009). For these reasons, NPPV may prove beneficial inchildren with acute asthma.
How the intervention might workNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) may have a directbronchodilating efect, may improve alveolar recruitment and mayincrease response to bronchodilators (Lin 1995; Wang 1996). Atleast some of the efect is thought to be independent of better drugdispersion (Buda 1979; Soroksky 2003; Tzoufi 2005). As describedin Description of the condition, an intrinsic positive end-expiratoryairway pressure is created during an asthma attack, and NPPV isthought to counteract this intrinsic PEEP by creating an extrinsicPEEP (Broux 1991). The result consists of presumed improvementin airflow, re-expansion of atelectatic lung segments, reversal ofhyper-inflation and supportive inspiratory muscles (Martin 1982;Shivaram 1987; Moloney 1999; Caramez 2005; Pavone 2013). Thismight in turn correct ventilation-perfusion mismatches and reducethe work of breathing (Andersen 1979; Martin 1982; Broux 1991;Aldrich 1993; Soroksky 2003; Graham 2007).A comparative study has shown that CPAP might reduce bronchialreactivity and sensitivity in histamine-induced asthma (Lin 1995).Another small observational study suggested that CPAP mightassist inspiratory muscles and reduce the work of breathing inmethacholine-induced asthma (Martin 1982).Bilateral positive airway pressure has been shown to improvebreathing, oxygenation, clinical asthma scores and alveolarventilation in several observational studies (Akingbola 2002;Beers 2007; Mayordomo-Colunga 2011; Williams 2011). Beers 2007showed that BiPAP seemed to improve oxygenation and decreasethe respiratory rate, while none of these children experienced arise in respiratory rate nor a decrease in saturation. Observationalstudies also suggest that BiPAP might decrease the proportion ofchildren who need intubation among children with severe asthma(Mayordomo-Colunga 2011; Williams 2011).
Why it is important to do this reviewAsthma is one of the most common causes of hospital admissionfor children and constitutes a significant economic burden (Braman2006; Bahadori 2009; Jacob 2015). Use of NPPV has increased inthe care of children with acute asthma (Carroll 2013) even thoughevidence is lacking (GINA 2015). Non-invasive positive pressureventilation might be an efective intervention for acute asthma, butno systematic review has been conducted to assess efects of NPPVas an add-on therapy to usual care in children.O B J E C T I V E STo assess the benefits and harms of non-invasive positive pressureventilation (NPPV) as an add-on therapy to usual care (e.g.bronchodilators and corticosteroids) in children with acute asthma.M E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesWe included randomised clinical trials regardless of publicationtype, publication status, publication date and language.Types of participantsWe included children (aged < 18 years) hospitalised for an asthmaattack (as defined by the trialists). We excluded children with aNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsprimary diagnosis of pneumonia, acute aspiration, bronchiolitis,cystic fibrosis or any ciliary dyskinetic syndrome.
Types of interventionsAny type of NPPV (including continuous positive airway pressure(CPAP) and bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP)). We includedtrials comparing NPPV as an add-on therapy to usual care versususual care.We excluded trials that examined weaning of invasive ventilationand trials in which NPPV or invasive ventilation precededenrolment of children into the trial.Types of outcome measures*All-cause mortality*Proportion of participants with a serious adverse event definedas any untoward medical occurrence that resulted in death, waslife threatening, jeopardised the participant, was persistent orled to significant disability or prolonged hospitalisation (ICH-GCP 1997)*Symptom score in the acute phase (e.g. Pediatric AsthmaSeverity Score (PASS), Pediatric Respiratory AssessmentMeasure (PRAM))*Non-serious adverse events (ICH-GCP 1997)*Health-related quality-of-life measures for long-term follow-up in children afer major trauma, such as DISABKIDS,KIDSCREEN-52 and PedsQL*Arterial blood gases and pH*Pneumonia diagnosed afer randomisation (as defined bytrialists)*CostWe assessed symptom score in the acute phase at the time pointof primary interest defined by study authors. If such a time point ofprimary interest was not defined, we planned to use the outcomeassessed at the first time point afer the start of the intervention,but before discharge.All additional dichotomous and continuous outcomes wereassessed at two time points.
*Outcomes assessed at the time point closest to hospitaldischarge.*Outcomes assessed at maximal follow-up (this was the timepoint of primary interest).We identified trials from the Cochrane Airways Group SpecialisedRegister (CAGR), which is maintained by the Information Specialistfor the Group. The Register contains trial reports identifiedthrough systematic searches of bibliographic databases, includingthe Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL),MEDLINE, Embase, the Cumulative Index to Nursing and AlliedHealth Literature (CINAHL), the Allied and ComplementaryMedicine Database (AMED) and PsycINFO, and by handsearchingof respiratory journals and meeting abstracts (see Appendix 1for details). We searched all records in the CAGR using thesearch strategy provided in Appendix 2. See Appendix 1 andAppendix 2 for our exact search terms. We also conducted asearch of ClinicalTrials.gov (www.ClinicalTrials.gov) and the WorldHealth Organization (WHO) trials portal (www.who.int/ictrp/en/).We searched all databases from their inception up to February 2016,and we imposed no restriction on language of publication.Searching other resourcesWe checked the reference lists of all relevant primary trials andreviews for additional references.We tried to identify unpublished trials by searching the clinicaltrial registers of Europe and the USA, websites of pharmaceuticalcompanies and websites of the US Food and Drug Administration(FDA) and the European Medicines Agency.We searched for errata and retractions from included studiespublished in full text on PubMed (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed).Data collection and analysis
Selection of studiesTwo  review authors (SKK and JF) independently screened titlesand abstracts. We retrieved all relevant full-text study reports/publications, and two review authors (SKK and JF) independentlyscreened the full text, identified trials for inclusion and identifiedand recorded reasons for exclusion of ineligible studies. Weresolved disagreements through discussion or, if required, weconsulted a third review author (JCJ). We recorded the selectionprocess in suficient detail to complete a PRISMA (PreferredReporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) flowdiagram (Moher 2009) and a Characteristics of excluded studiestable.Data extraction and managementWe recorded trial characteristics and outcome data using datacollection forms that had been piloted on at least one trial in thereview. Two review authors (SKK and JF) extracted the followingtrial characteristics from included trials, when available.
*Methods: trial design, total duration of the trial, number of trialcentres and locations, trial setting, withdrawals and trial dates.*Participants: number of participants in each intervention group,mean age, age range, gender, severity of condition, diagnosticcriteria, baseline lung function, smoking history, inclusioncriteria and exclusion criteria.*Interventions: intervention, comparison, pressure device, maskinterface and concomitant medications.*Outcomes: primary and secondary outcomes specified andcollected and time points reported.*Notes: funding for trial and notable conflicts of interest of trialauthors.Two review authors (SKK and JF) independently extracted outcomedata from included trials. We noted in the Characteristics ofincluded studies table if outcome data were not reported in auseable way. We resolved disagreements by consensus or byconsultation with a third person (JCJ). One review author (SKK)transferred data into the Review Manager (Review Manager 2014)Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsfile. We double-checked that data were entered correctly bycomparing data presented in the systematic review with dataprovided in the study reports. A second review author (JF) spot-checked study characteristics for accuracy against the trial report.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesWe used the instructions given in the Cochrane Handbookfor Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011) in ourevaluation of the methods and hence the risk of bias ofincluded trials. Again, two review authors (SKK and JF) eachindependently assessed the included trials. We evaluated themethods in terms of generation of allocation sequence, allocationconcealment, blinding of participants and treatment providers,blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data,selective outcome reporting and other sources of bias, becausethese components enabled classification of randomised trials withlow risk of bias and high risk of bias. The latter trials tendto overestimate positive intervention efects and underestimatenegative efects (Moher 1998; Kjaergard 2001; Gluud 2006; Wood2008; Lundh 2012; Savovic 2012).We classified trials according to the components below.Allocation sequence generation
*Low risk: if sequence generation was achieved using a computerrandom number generator or a random numbers table. Drawinglots, tossing a coin, shufling cards and throwing dice werealso considered adequate if performed by an independentadjudicator.*Unclear risk: if the method of randomisation was not specified,but the trial was still presented as randomised.*High risk: if the allocation sequence was not randomised or wasonly quasi-randomised.*Low risk: if allocation of participants was performed by a centralindependent unit, an on-site locked computer, identical-lookingnumbered sealed envelopes or drug bottles or containersprepared by an independent pharmacist or investigator.*Uncertain risk: if the trial was classified as randomised but theallocation concealment process was not described.*High risk: if the allocation sequence was familiar to theinvestigators who assigned participants.Blinding of participants and treatment providers*Low risk: if participants and treatment providers were blinded tointervention allocation and this was described.*Uncertain risk: if the procedure of blinding was insuficientlydescribed.*High risk: if blinding of participants and treatment providers wasnot performed.
Blinding of outcome assessment*Low risk of bias: if it was mentioned that outcome assessorswere blinded and this was described.*Uncertain risk of bias: if it was not mentioned whether outcomeassessors in the trial were blinded, or if the extent of blindingwas insuficiently described.*High risk of bias: if no blinding or incomplete blinding ofoutcome assessors was performed.*Low risk of bias: if missing data were unlikely to make treatmentefects depart from plausible values. This could occur as (1)no drop-outs or withdrawals reported for all outcomes, or (2)numbers and reasons for withdrawals and drop-outs for alloutcomes clearly stated and described as similar in both groups.Generally, we judged the trial as having low risk of bias due toincomplete outcome data if drop-outs accounted for less than5% of participants. However, the 5% cut-of is not definitive.*Uncertain risk of bias: if information was insuficient forassessment of whether missing data were likely to induce biasin the results.*High risk of bias: if results were likely to be biased owingto missing data because the pattern of drop-outs could bedescribed as diferent in the two intervention groups, or becausethe trial used improper methods in dealing with missing data(e.g. last observation carried forward).
Selective outcome reporting*Low risk of bias: if a protocol was published before or at the timethe trial was begun and investigators reported on the outcomesspecified in the protocol. If no protocol was available, or if theprotocol was published afer the trial had begun, reporting of all-cause mortality and serious adverse events granted the trial agrade of low risk of bias.*Uncertain risk of bias: if no protocol was published andinvestigators did not report on the outcomes all-cause mortalityand serious adverse events.*High risk of bias: if study authors did not report on the outcomesincluded in the protocol.*Low risk of bias: if the trial appeared to be free of othercomponents (e.g. academic bias, for-profit bias) that could putit at risk of bias.*Unclear risk of bias: if it was unclear whether other risk of biascould afect trial results.*High risk of bias: if other factors in the trial could put it at risk ofbias (e.g. authors have conducted trials on the same topic, for-profit bias is present) .Overall risk of biasWe assessed overall risk of bias in three groups, as it may be dificultto blind participants and treatment providers performing NPPV.*Low risk of bias: We classified the outcome result as havingoverall 'low risk of bias' only if all of the bias domains describedin the previous paragraphs were classified as presenting low riskof bias.*Potentially medium risk of bias: We classified the outcomeresult as having overall 'potentially medium risk of bias' if allbias domains described in the previous paragraphs, excluding'blinding of participants and personnel', were classified aspresenting 'low risk of bias'.*High risk of bias: We classified the outcome result as having'high risk of bias' if any of the bias risk domains describedNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewspreviously, excluding 'blinding of participants and personnel',were classified as presenting 'unclear' or 'high risk of bias'.We assessed the domains 'Blinding of outcome assessment','Incomplete outcome data' and 'Selective outcome reporting' foreach outcome. Thus, we planned to assess the bias risk for eachresult, as well as for each trial. We based our primary conclusionsas well as our presentation in Summary of findings for the maincomparison on the results of our primary outcomes with low risk ofbias.We graded each potential source of bias as high, low or unclear andprovided a quote from the trial report together with a justificationfor our judgement in the Risk of bias in included studies table.We summarised 'Risk of bias' judgements across diferent trials foreach of the domains listed.Assessment of bias in conducting the systematic reviewWe conducted the review according to the published protocol(Korang 2016) and reported any deviations under Diferencesbetween protocol and review.Measures of treatment efectWe calculated risk ratios (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs)for dichotomous outcomes.Continous outcomesWe calculated mean diferences (MDs) and standardised meandiferences (SMDs) with 95% CIs for continuous outcomes.Dealing with missing dataDichotomous outcomesWe did not impute missing values for any outcomes in our primaryanalysis. In two of our sensitivity analyses, we planned to imputedata (see Sensitivity analysis).Continuous outcomes
We primarily analysed scores assessed at single time points. Ifonly changes from baseline scores were reported, we planned toanalyse the results together with follow-up scores (Higgins 2011).If standard deviations (SDs) were not reported, we planned tocalculate SDs using data from the trial if possible. We did notuse intention-to-treat data if the original report did not containsuch data. We did not impute missing values for any outcomesin our primary analysis. In our sensitivity analysis for continuousoutcomes, we planned to impute data (see Sensitivity analysis).We contacted investigators and trial sponsors to verify key trialcharacteristics and to obtain missing numerical outcome datawhen possible (e.g. when a study was identified as abstract only).Assessment of heterogeneityWe planned to visually inspect forest plots to assess signsof heterogeneity and to explore possible heterogeneity in ourprespecified subgroup analyses. We inspected trial characteristicsacross trials to identify clinical heterogeneity. We planned to assessthe presence of statistical heterogeneity by using the Chi2 test(threshold P < 0.10) and to measure the quantities of heterogeneityvia the I2 statistic (Higgins 2002; Higgins 2003).Assessment of reporting biasesWe planned to use a funnel plot to assess reporting bias if weincluded 10 or more trials. We planned to visually inspect funnelplots to assess the risk of bias. For dichotomous outcomes, weplanned to test asymmetry by using the Harbord test (Harbord2006). For continuous outcomes, we planned to use the regressionasymmetry test (Egger 1997) and the adjusted rank correlation(Begg 1994). However, we did not perform any of these tasksbecause data were insuficient.Data synthesis
Meta-analysisWe undertook this meta-analysis according to therecommendations stated in the Cochrane Handbook for SystematicReviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011). We used the statisticalsofware Review Manager 5 (Review Manager 2014) provided byCochrane to analyse data.We assessed our intervention efects by performing both random-efects meta-analyses (DerSimonian 1986) and fixed-efect meta-analyses (DeMets 1987). We used the more conservative pointestimate of the two (Jakobsen 2014). We used three primaryoutcomes and, therefore, considered a P value of 0.025 or less as thethreshold for statistical significance (Jakobsen 2014). We used aneight-step procedure to assess whether thresholds for significancewere crossed (Jakobsen 2014). We planned to base our primaryconclusion on results with low risk of bias (Jakobsen 2014).When multiple trial arms were reported in a single trial, we plannedto include only the relevant arms. If two comparisons (e.g. CPAPvs usual care and BiPAP vs usual care) were combined in the samemeta-analysis, we planned to halve the control group to avoiddouble-counting.
Traditional meta-analysis runs the risk of random errors due tosparse data and repetitive testing of accumulating data duringreview updates. We therefore planned to perform Trial SequentialAnalyses on the outcomes, to calculate the required informationsize and the cumulative Z-curve breach of relevant trial sequentialmonitoring boundaries (Brok 2008; Wetterslev 2008; Brok 2009;Thorlund 2009; Wetterslev 2009; Thorlund 2010; Thorlund 2011;TSA 2011). We wished to control risks of type I and type II errors. Amore detailed description of Trial Sequential Analysis can be foundat For dichotomous outcomes, we planned to estimate the requiredinformation size based on the observed, unweighted proportion ofparticipants with an outcome in the control group (the cumulativeproportion of participants with an event in the control groupsrelative to all participants in the control groups), a relative riskreduction of 20%, an alpha of 2.5%, a beta of 20% and diversity assuggested by trials in the meta-analysis. For continuous outcomesin the Trial Sequential Analysis, we planned to use the observed SD,a mean diference in the observed SD/2, risk of type I error of 2.5%and risk of type II error of 20%.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews'Summary of findings' table
We created a 'Summary of findings' table using each of theprespecified outcomes. We used the five GRADE considerations(study limitations, consistency of efect, imprecision, indirectnessand publication bias) to assess the quality of the body ofevidence as it relates to the trials that contributed data to themeta-analyses for prespecified outcomes. We used methods andrecommendations described in Section 8.5 and Chapter 12 ofthe Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions(Higgins 2011) and GRADEpro sofware. We justified all decisions todowngrade or upgrade the quality of studies by using footnotes,and we made comments to aid the reader's understanding of thereview when necessary. We planned to present in the 'Summary offindings' table our results from trials with low risk of bias, as well asour results from all trials.Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneityWe planned to carry out the following subgroup analyses for ourprimary outcomes.*High risk of bias trials versus low risk of bias trials.*Age of participants: neonates (zero to one month), infants (onemonth to one year), children of preschool age (one to five years),children of school age (five to 12 years), adolescents (over 12years).*CPAP versus BIPAP.*Trials including children with 'clearly defined severe asthma'versus remaining trials.*Children who had good compliance with regular use ofinhaled corticosteroids versus those who had poor or unknowncompliance.*Children who had good compliance with regular use of long-acting beta agonists versus those who had poor or unknowncompliance.*Types of masks used to administer NPPV.
We planned to use the formal test for subgroup interactions inReview Manager (Review Manager 2014).Sensitivity analysisTo assess the potential impact of missing data, we planned toperform the following sensitivity analyses on primary outcomes.*'Best-worst-case' scenario: We planned to assume that allparticipants lost to follow-up in the experimental groupsurvived, had no serious adverse events and had a beneficialoutcome with regards to the symptom score; and that allparticipants with missing outcomes in the control group did notsurvive, had a serious adverse event and had a harmful outcomewith regards to the symptom score.*'Worst-best-case' scenario: We planned to assume that allparticipants lost to follow-up in the experimental group did notsurvive, had a serious adverse event and had a harmful outcomewith regards to the symptom score; and that all participantslost to follow-up in the control group survived, had no seriousadverse event and had a beneficial outcome with regards to thesymptom score.When analysing continuous outcomes, we planned to definea 'beneficial outcome' as the group mean plus two standarddeviations (SDs) of the group mean (we planned to then use one SDin another analysis), and a 'harmful outcome' as the group meanminus two SDs of the group mean (we planned to then use one SDin another analysis) (Jakobsen 2014).We planned to present results of both scenarios in our review.To assess the potential impact of missing SDs for continuousoutcomes, we planned to perform the following sensitivity analysis.
When SDs are missing and it is not possible to calculate them, weplanned to impute SDs from trials with similar populations and lowrisk of bias. If we found no such trials, we planned to impute SDsfrom trials with a similar population. As the final option, we wouldimpute SDs from all trials.We planned to present results of this scenario in our review.Other post hoc sensitivity analyses might be warranted if weidentified unexpected clinical or statistical heterogeneity duringanalysis of review results (Jakobsen 2014).R E S U L T SDescription of studiesWe assessed all studies according to the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions (Higgins 2011) and the protocolfor this review (Korang 2016). Characteristics of each study can befound in the Characteristics of included studies, Characteristics ofexcluded studies and Characteristics of ongoing studies tables.Results of the searchOur initial search identified 311 references. We found no duplicates.We deemed 33 studies relevant and obtained full texts for furtherevaluation (see Figure 1). Of these, we included two completedstudies (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012). We added two ongoing trialsto the review, but these trials have not yet reported any data(NCT02347462; NCT01497691). Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews Included studiesTwo trials met our inclusion criteria (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012). Fordetailed descriptions, see the Characteristics of included studiestable.
Both were single-centre trials conducted in a PICU setting in theUnited States.The two studies included a total of 40 participants. The mean ageof participants was six years (range, zero to 11 years), and the meanproportion of girls was 55%. We noted no statistically significantdiferences in any of the baseline characteristics described (Thill2004; Basnet 2012). This lack of statistical significance very wellcould have been caused by random error due to small sample sizesor due to systematic error caused by failed randomisation.Both included trials used BiPAP. Basnet 2012 intervened with BiPAPfor 24 hours, and Thill 2004 with BiPAP for two hours. Investigatorsgradually increased inspiratory positive airway pressure to 8 cmH2O in Basnet 2012, and to 10 cm H2O in Thill 2004. Bothtrials set end-expiratory positive airway pressure to 5 cm H2O(Thill 2004; Basnet 2012) and first tried nasal masks; if this wasunsuccessful, they applied full facemasks. Thill 2004 used an 'S/Tmachine' (Respironics, Murrysville, PA), whereas Basnet 2012 used'Vision Bipap' (Respironics).In both trials, both groups received similar planned standardcare as a co-intervention (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012). Neither of theincluded trials assessed the use of CPAP.methylprednisolone 1 to 2 mg/kg/d (maximum 80 mg/d) (Thill2004; Basnet 2012) and supplemental oxygen. One trial also usedadjunct therapy, which included magnesium sulfate and helium-oxygen heliox mixtures (Basnet 2012).OutcomesOnly Thill 2004 reported all-cause mortality. Both trials reportedserious adverse events and provided symptom scores (Thill 2004;Basnet 2012). Thill 2004 used the Clinical Asthma Score, and Basnet2012 the Pediatric Asthma Severity Score.Neither of these trials reported quality of life, costs or arterial bloodgases/pH. Both trials reported on non-serious adverse events (Thill2004; Basnet 2012).
Excluded studiesWe assessed 31 trials as relevant upon review of the abstract,but later excluded them upon review of the full publication.Eighteen of the excluded studies involved adult participants only(Anderson 1982; Branscomb 1982; Webber 1982; Frischknecht1991; Christensen 1993; Aron 1999; Cross 2003; Soroksky 2003;de Miranda 2004; Bahera 2007; Soma 2008; Brandao 2009;Brandao 2009a; Chaudhry 2010; Sutherasan 2011; Hanekom 2012;Sutherasan 2013; Rondinel 2015). Three trials did not reportthe age of participants and did not mention inclusion of anychildren (Andersen 1982; Ferrari 2007; Filho 2009). We excludedfour trials because the children were not hospitalised (Parkes 1997;Edwards 2003; Edwards 2004; Holbrook 2016). Three trials werenot randomised (Thill 1998; Soma 2002; Basnet 2010), one trial didnot include participants with asthma (Archis 2001) and in one trial,participants received something other than NPPV (Compagnoni2000). One trial included children and adults but did not provideseparate data for children (Fergusson 1983). See the Characteristicsof excluded studies table for full information.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsWhen participant age was unclear or separate data were notavailable for children, we contacted the study authors. However, weobtained no additional information on these trials.
Risk of bias in included studiesWe assessed both included studies as having overall high risk ofbias (see Figure 2). We contacted the authors of both trials forclarification, as some data were missing and several bias domainswere unclear. We received no response from Basnet 2012, but Thill2004 provided us with details concerning serious adverse eventsand the randomisation process. Figure 2.   Risk of bias summary: review authors' judgements about each risk of bias item for each included study. AllocationThill 2004 allocated participants with slips of paper drawn atrandom from an envelope, resulting in assessment of 'unclear' risk.Thill 2004 did not describe allocation concealment. Basnet 2012did not describe how allocation sequence generation or allocationconcealment was performed, and we judged risk in both domainsas 'unclear'.Neither of the two included trials blinded participants or treatmentproviders. As we assessed several other bias domains as havinghigh or uncertain risk, this did not afect the overall risk of bias inaccordance with our protocol (Korang 2016). Neither trial describedwhether outcome assessors were blinded. However, both trials(Thill 2004; Basnet 2012) used independent investigators to assesssymptom scores.Incomplete outcome dataOne trial reported four drop-outs and did not include them in theanalysis (Thill 2004). The other trial (Basnet 2012) performed asecondary intention-to-treat analysis but provided only a P valuewithout full data for this analysis.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsOne trial did not report mortality (Basnet 2012), resulting in anuncertain risk of bias. The other trial reported both mortality andserious adverse events (Thill 2004). Neither trial provided a pre-published protocol.
Other potential sources of biasReview authors observed no other biases.Efects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings for the main comparisonA total of two trials (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012) met all of the inclusioncriteria. We were able to assess in part mortality, serious adverseevents and symptom scores as primary outcomes in additionto the secondary outcomes of non-serious adverse events andpneumonia.Subgroup-analyses based on risk, age, type of NPPV, type of maskand asthma severity were not performed, as the two trials werein the same category with regard to these subgroups. None of thetrials described medical compliance.Primary outcomesAll-cause mortalityOne trial with 16 participants (eight in the NPPV arm and eight inthe control arm) assessed mortality (Thill 2004) and reported noevents in either group (Analysis 1.1). Hence, we performed no meta-analysis and no Trial Sequential Analysis (TSA).Serious adverse eventsBoth trials assessed a total of 35 participants (17 in the NPPV armand 18 in the control arm) for serious adverse events (Thill 2004;Basnet 2012) and reported no events in either group (Analysis2.1). Hence, we performed no meta-analysis and no TSA. Fourparticipants in Thill 2004 did not complete the trial (one wasintubated and three others reported discomfort with the BiPAP).However, researchers did not include these participants in theiranalysis.Symptom scores
Both trials assessed a total of 35 participants (17 in the NPPV armand 18 in the control arm) for symptom scores (Thill 2004; Basnet2012) (Analysis 3.1). However, neither the Basnet 2012 trial nor thefirst phase of the cross-over trial (Thill 2004) reported standarddeviations (SDs). We therefore had to estimate the standard error(SE) from the graph (Figure 2) in Basnet 2012 and then calculate theSD. We estimated the SE to be 0.985 (SD = 2.96) for the interventiongroup, and 0.539 (SD = 1.7) for the control group when assessing theprimary time point of interest (zero to two hours). The calculatedSD indicated that Basnet 2012 reported a reduced symptom score(mean diference (MD) -2.50, 95% confidence interval (CI) -4.70 to-0.30; P = 0.03, participants = 19, very low quality of evidence).Thill 2004 provided a figure illustrating symptom scores at the endof the intervention, for which a mean symptom score could beapproximated as 1.9 in the NPPV group and 5.6 in the control group.According to our protocol, we would therefore try to impute SDs forthe Thill 2004 trial. However, this could not be done because thetwo trials used diferent symptom score systems.As we performed no meta-analysis, we did not estimateheterogeneity.Trial Sequential AnalysisAs we performed no meta-analysis, we did not conduct a TSA.Secondary outcomesNon-serious adverse eventsThe two trials assessed a total of 35 participants (17 in the NPPV armand 18 in the control arm) (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012) for non-seriousadverse events (see Table 1).Health-related quality-of-lifeNo trials reported quality of life.Arterial blood gases and pHNo trials reported blood gases or pH.PneumoniaOne trial with 19 participants (nine in the NPPV arm and 10 in thecontrol arm) assessed pneumonia (Basnet 2012) and reported noevents in either group (Analysis 4.1). Hence, we performed no meta-analysis.CostNeither trial reported cost.D I S C U S S I O N
Summary of main resultsWe included two trials that randomised a total of 40 participants.We assessed these trials as having high risk of bias and a total of fivedrop-outs. We were able to perform neither meta-analysis nor TrialSequential Analysis (TSA) on our primary outcome of mortality, asno events were reported. Both trials reported no serious adverseevents. Meta-analysis of symptom scores was not possible, as Thill2004 was a cross-over trial and did not report a standard deviation(SD), and we could not estimated the SD from before the cross-over. We were not able to impute SDs from the Basnet 2012 trial, asinvestigators used two diferent types of symptom score systems.Both trials showed a statistically significant reduction in symptomscores. Basnet 2012 showed that non-invasive positive pressureventilation (NPPV) improved symptom scores (mean diference(MD) -2.50, 95% confidence interval (CI) -4.70 to -0.30, P = 0.03,19 participants, GRADE: very low quality of evidence). In Thill2004, NPPV was also associated with a lower total symptomscore (5.6 vs 1.9, 19 participants, GRADE: very low quality ofevidence) before cross-over, although no SD was reported in theassessment before the cross-over. Both trials favoured the NPPVgroup. Researchers reported five drop-outs (12.5%), four of whichwere due to intolerance to NPPV, and one to respiratory failure/intubation. The benefits and harms of NPPV remain unclear owingto the lack of well-powered trials and the high risk of systematicerrors.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsObservational studies and clinical experience
As already described in the Background, some observationalstudies suggest that NPPV might be a safe alternative to invasiveventilation in asthma and other types of respiratory failure (Keenan2009). Some suggest beneficial efects on respiratory functionwith the use of NPPV for acute asthma in children (Beers 2007;Mayordomo-Colunga 2011; Williams 2011). Use of NPPV in childrenwith acute asthma has increased (Carroll 2013), perhaps becauseclinicians have had positive experiences with NPPV. However,observational studies and clinical expertise are insuficient topermit full assessment of the benefits and harms of an intervention(Jakobsen 2013; Hemkens 2016).Choice of primary outcomes
Mortality is one of the most important outcomes for the patient.However, the mortality rate among children with acute asthmais low (Asher 2014). Therefore, a very large number of includedparticipants would be required for investigators to detect anypossible diference. Hence, one might question the relevance of all-cause mortality as a primary outcome. The same argument mightbe made for serious adverse events. However, one must be carefulwhen making assumptions, and it might be true that use of NPPVwould increase the mortality rate because in theory this coulddelay necessary intubation. Therefore, we have chosen all-causemortality and serious adverse events as primary outcomes.Our third primary outcome, symptom score, has been shownto provide a quick assessment of response to treatment amongchildren with acute asthma when specific types of symptom scoresare used (Chalut 2000; Ducharme 2008). Symptom score mightalso be a more realistic outcome for detecting diferences betweenintervention groups. Nevertheless, one should always carefullyconsider the clinical implications and the clinical meaning of scoresand scales when interpreting such results. The danger alwaysexists that a given statistically significant result may not haveclinical relevance. To assess clinical relevance, an observationalstudy suggests that a reduction of three or more points shouldbe considered a clinically meaningful change in the 12-pointPreschool Respiratory Assessment Measure (PRAM) score system(Ducharme 2008). The two symptom score systems observed in theincluded trials are eight-point and nine-point systems; therefore, areduction of three or more points would surely represent a clinicallysignificant change (Thill 2004; Basnet 2012).
Overall completeness and applicability of evidenceWe were not able to perform any meta-analyses. Therefore, wecannot conclude whether NPPV shows benefit or harm comparedwith standard care in children with acute asthma. More and largerrandomised clinical trials with low risks of bias are needed to assessthis.Quality of the evidenceHeterogeneityAs no meta-analysis was performed, we did not assessheterogeneity.Risk of systematic error ('bias')We found no studies and no outcome results with low risk ofbias. Our results may show an overestimation of benefit andan underestimation of harm associated with nutritional support(Savovic 2012).
It was not possible to assess publication bias, as we included onlytwo studies.Risk of random error ('play of chance')It was not possible to perform TSA, as we performed no meta-analysis.GRADEWe have assessed the quality of the evidence for each outcomeby using the GRADE approach (Summary of findings for themain comparison). The GRADE assessment generally showedthat evidence was of very low quality. Reasons for the GRADEassessment are given in the footnotes of the table (Summary offindings for the main comparison).Potential biases in the review processThe main limitation of this Cochrane review is the paucity ofevidence for the use of NPPV in children with asthma. We madenumerous attempts to contact the authors of diferent trials toobtain raw data. However, our inability to obtain all relevantinformation might introduce a bias, which has the potential toalter the outcome of the meta-analysis. In addition, biases thatoccur because of the methodological design of included studiesmight not be adequately accounted for, despite assessment by twoindependent review authors. Another potential limitation of thisreview design is that NPPV is ofen administered in an intensivecare unit (ICU) setting, whereas usual care might be provided ina non-ICU setting, accounting for risk of potential bias involvingrandomisation of participants not only to diferent interventiongroups but also to diferent settings. However, this was not the casein the included trials, in which all randomised participants weretreated in an ICU setting.Agreements and disagreements with other studies orreviews
One review (Silva 2015) was published while this review was beingconducted. This published review also included observationalstudies, and review authors conducts no meta-analysis. Theconclusion of review authors was that NPPV is applicable inthe treatment of status asthmaticus in most paediatric patientsunresponsive to standard treatment (Silva 2015). However, theyalso concluded that the current body of evidence is not conclusive,and that further high-quality research is needed to estimate theefect of NPPV in children with acute asthma (Silva 2015).A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N SImplications for practiceCurrent evidence does not allow confirmation or rejection ofthe efects of NPPV in children with acute asthma. If a child isadmitted with acute asthma, and it is assessed that intubation isnot indicated at the moment, one might consider NPPV as an add-on therapy to standard care. Use of NPPV remains controversial,and additional research is required before changes to standardpractice can be recommended.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsImplications for researchHigh-quality randomised clinical trials are needed to assess theefects of NPPV in children with acute asthma. Such trials should:*randomise a suficient number of participants to demonstrate areliable result;*assess all-cause mortality, serious adverse events, asthmasymptom scores and quality of life;*be conducted with low risk of bias; and*blind treatment providers and participants throughsubtherapeutic (sham) NPPV; low pressures (e.g. < 5 cm H2O)can be used in an attempt to mask NPPV treatment (asdemonstrated by Soroksky 2003) to eliminate the bias that lackof blinding. However, we cannot exclude the possibility thatsham NPPV may be harmful; therefore, this recommendationshould be considered only on a case-by-case basis.A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SJimmy Chong was the Editor and commented critically on both theprotocol and the full review.The review author team would like to acknowledge the Airwayseditorial team for their professional and highly qualified commentsand contributions throughout the process of writing this review.The Background and Methods sections of this protocol are based ona standard template used by the Cochrane Airways Review Group.
This project was supported by the National Institute for HealthResearch (NIHR), via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to theCochrane Airways Review Group. The views and opinions expressedherein are those of the review authors and do not necessarily reflectthose of the Systematic Reviews Programme, NIHR, the NationalHealth Service (NHS) or the Department of Health.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewBasnet S, Mander G, Andoh J, Klaska H, Verhulst S, Koirala J.Safety, eficacy, and tolerability of early initiation of noninvasivepositive pressure ventilation in pediatric patients admitted withstatus asthmaticus: a pilot study. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine2012;13(4):393-8. [CENTRAL: 834472; CRS: 4900100000062937;EMBASE: 2012437313]
Thill 2004 {published data only}Thill PJ, McGuire JK, Baden HP, Green TP, Checchia PA.Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation in children withlower airway obstruction. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine2004;5(4):337-42. [CENTRAL: 489916; CRS: 4900100000017175;PUBMED: 15215002] References to studies excluded from this reviewAndersen JB, Klausen NO. A new mode of administration ofnebulized bronchodilator in severe bronchospasm. EuropeanJournal of Respiratory Diseases. Supplement 1982;119:97-100.[CENTRAL: 28284; CRS: 4900100000001266; EMBASE:1982208248; PUBMED: 7047190]Anderson PB, Goude A, Peake MD. Comparison of salbutamolgiven by intermittent positive-pressure breathing and pressure-packed aerosol in chronic asthma. Thorax 1982;37(8):612-6.[CENTRAL: 188486; CRS: 4900100000007135; EMBASE:1982245924]Archis 2001 {published data only}Archis C, Dunford M, Lazaris M, Jacques T, Skowronski G,Gotsopoulos H, et al. A randomised control trial of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in acute exacerbations of chronicairflow limitation (CAL) in a ward setting. Thoracic Society ofAustralia and New Zealand Annual Scientific Meeting March16-21; Brisbane. Brisbane, 2001. [CENTRAL: 340807; CRS:4900100000010407]Aron 1999 {published data only}
Aron C, Moutaux G. [Non-invasive ventilation in acute orchronic respiratory failure: a comparison of volumetricventilation] [Ventilation non invasive dans les decompensationsrespiratoires aigues des broncho-pneumopathies chroniquesobstructives. Comparaison de ventilations barometriqueet volumetrique]. Revue des Maladies Respiratoires1999;16(2):181-7. [CENTRAL: 332371; CRS: 4900100000010182;4900100000010182; PUBMED:  10339761]Bahera 2007 {published data only}Bahera D, Agarwal R. Non invasive ventilation in acute asthma,2007.  [CRS:4900100000040918]Basnet S, Mander G, Andoh J, Koirala J. Early initiation ofnoninvasive positive pressure ventilation in the managementof children with status asthmaticus [Abstract]. Pediatric CriticalCare Medicine. 2010; Vol. 11, issue 5:658. [CENTRAL: 774436;CRS: 4900100000025949; EMBASE: 70287754]Brandao 2009 {published data only}Brandao DC, Lima VM, Filho VG, Silva TS, Campos TF, Dean E,et al. Reversal of bronchial obstruction with bi-level positiveairway pressure and nebulization in patients with acute asthma.Journal of Asthma 2009;46(4):356-61. [CENTRAL: 697266; CRS:4900100000023867; PUBMED: 19484669]Brandao 2009a {published data only}Brandao DC, Lima VM, Filho VG, Silva TS, Campos TF, Dean E,et al. Reversal of bronchial obstruction with bi-level positiveairway pressure and nebulization in patients with acute asthma.The Journal of Asthma 2009;46(4):356-61. [PUBMED: 19484669]
Branscomb 1982 {published data only}Branscomb BV. Metaproterenol solution in the treatment ofasthmatic patients by intermittent positive pressure breathing.Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 1982;22(5-6):231-5. [CENTRAL:190619; CRS: 4900100000007213; EMBASE: 1982167187]Chaudhry 2010 {published data only}Chaudhry D, Indora M, Sangwan V, Sehgal IPS, Chaudhry A,Chaudhry D, et al. Evaluation of non-invasive ventilationin management of acute severe asthma [Abstract]. Thorax.2010; Vol. 65, issue Suppl 4:S68. [CENTRAL: 783244; CRS:4900100000026301; EMBASE: 70325758]Christensen 1993 {published data only}Christensen EF, Norregaard O, Jensen LW, Dahl R. Inhaled beta2-agonist and positive expiratory pressure in bronchial asthma.Influence on airway resistance and functional residual capacity[ENGLISH]. Chest 1993;104(4):1108-13. [CENTRAL: 96122; CRS:4900100000004202; PUBMED: 8404176]Compagnoni 2000 {published data only}Compagnoni ML, Nava S. Bronchodilator eficacy during non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIMV). American Journal ofRespiratory and Critical Care Medicine 2000;161(3 Suppl):A556.[CENTRAL: 429057; CRS: 4900100000014613]
Cross 2003 {published data only}Cross AM, Cameron P, Kierce M, Ragg M, Kelly AM. Non-invasive ventilation in acute respiratory failure: a randomisedcomparison of continuous positive airway pressure and bi-level positive airway pressure. Emergency Medicine Journal2003;20(6):531-4. [CENTRAL: 475013; CRS: 4900100000016379;EMBASE:  2003491615; 4900100000016379; PUBMED: 14623840]de Miranda 2004 {published data only}de Miranda AS, Silva COS, Beppu OS, Damasceno MCP,Vieira MDD. Noninvasive ventilation for continuous positiveairway pressure (CPAP) associate to the bronchodilator inthe treatment of the bronchial asthma crisis [Portuguese].Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsEdwards N, Blyton DM, O'Meara T, Poulos L, Brannan JD,Sullivan E. Nocturnal nasal CPAP use improves respiratoryfunction in moderate to severe asthma [Abstract]. Journalof Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2003; Vol. 111, issue 2Suppl:S215. [CENTRAL: 524763; CRS: 4900100000018694]Edwards N, Blyton D, Sullivan C. Asthma is improvedwith nocturnal nasal CPAP [abstract]. Internal MedicineJournal. 2004; Vol. 34, issue 3:A30. [CENTRAL: 591896; CRS:4900100000020525; 4900100000020525]Fergusson 1983 {published data only}Fergusson RJ, Carmichael J, Raferty P, Willey RF, Crompton GK,Grant IW. Nebulized salbutamol in life-threatening asthma:is IPPB necessary?. British Journal of Diseases of the Chest1983;77(3):255-61. [CENTRAL: 187253; CRS: 4900100000007077;EMBASE: 1983207875]Ferrari 2007 {published data only}Ferrari R, Grof P, Agostinelli D, Bertele L, Lazzari R, Di Battista N.Acute asthma treatment by noninvasive CPAP in the emergencydepartment [Abstract]. European Respiratory Journal. 2007;Vol. 30, issue Suppl 51:265s [E1665]. [CENTRAL: 642694; CRS:4900100000022252]Filho 2009 {published data only}
Filho VG, Rodrigues Machado M, Brandao D, Alcoforado L,Galvao AM, Fregonezi Getal, et al. Coupling of noninvasivemechanical ventilation and nebulization during asthmaexacerbations: higher amount of aerosol deposition into theairways or efective mechanical bronchodilation due to positivepressure? [Abstract]. European Respiratory Society AnnualCongress, Vienna, Austria, September 12-16. 2009:[P2292].[CENTRAL: 756100; CRS: 4900100000025074]Frischknecht 1991 {published data only}Frischknecht Christensen E, Norregaard O, Dahl R.Treatment of bronchial asthma with terbutaline inhaled byconespacer combined with positive expiratory pressure mask[ENGLISH]. Chest 1991;100(2):317-21. [CENTRAL: 77251; CRS:4900100000003468; PUBMED: 1864100]Hanekom 2012 {published data only}Hanekom SG, van Aswegen H, Engelbrecht L, Becker PJ. Efectof continuous and bilevel noninvasive ventilation for acuteasthma exacerbation: a randomized controlled trial [Abstract].European Respiratory Journal. 2012; Vol. 40, issue Suppl56:832s [4562]. [CENTRAL: 839364; CRS: 4900100000067971;EMBASE: 71923962]Holbrook 2016 {published data only}Holbrook JT, Sugar EA, Brown RH, Drye LT, Irvin CG, Schwarz AR,et al. Efect of CPAP on airways reactivity in asthma: arandomized sham-controlled clinical trial. Annals of theAmerican Thoracic Society 2016 July 11 [Epub ahead of print].Parkes 1997 {published data only}
Parkes SN, Bersten AD. Aerosol kinetics and bronchodilatoreficacy during continuous positive airway pressure deliveredby face mask. Thorax 1997;52(2):171-5. [CENTRAL: 137392; CRS:4900100000005612; 4900100000005612; PUBMED:  9059480]Rondinel 2015 {published data only}Rondinel TZ, Correa IF, Hoscheidt LM, Bueno MH, Da Silva LMC,Reppold CT, et al. Incentive spirometry combined withexpiratory positive airway pressure improves asthma controland quality of life in asthma: a randomised controlled trial.Journal of Asthma 2015;52(2):220-6. [CENTRAL: 1076705; CRS:4900132000004120; EMBASE: 2015136465]Soma T, Hino M, Tanaka Y, Kudou S. Treatment of acutebronchospasm with noninvasive positive pressure ventilation(NIPPV). American Journal of Respiratory and Critical CareMedicine 2002;165(8 Suppl):A191. [CENTRAL: 384284; CRS:4900100000011890; 4900100000011890]Soma T, Hino M, Kida K, Kudoh S. A prospective and randomizedstudy for improvement of acute asthma by non-invasivepositive pressure ventilation (NPPV). Internal Medicine(Tokyo, Japan) 2008;47(6):493-501. [CENTRAL: 630834; CRS:4900100000021853; PUBMED: 18344635]Soroksky 2003 {published data only}Soroksky A, Stav D, Shpirer I. A pilot prospective, randomized,placebo-controlled trial of bilevel positive airway pressure inacute asthmatic attack. Chest 2003;123(4):1018-25. [CENTRAL:430949; CRS: 4900100000015109; PUBMED: 12684289]Sutherasan Y, Kiatboonsri S, Kiatboonsri C, Theerawit P,Trakulsrichai S. The impact of continuous positive airwaypressure on the treatment of acute exacerbation of asthma:randomised controlled trial of eficacy [Abstract]. Respirology(Carlton, Vic.). 2011; Vol. 16, issue Suppl 2:197 [134]. [CENTRAL:833806; CRS: 4900100000054329; EMBASE: 70576352]
Sutherasan Y, Kiatboonsri S, Theerawit P, Kiatboonsri C,Trakulsrichai S. Impact of continuous positive airwaypressure on the treatment of acute exacerbation of asthma: arandomised controlled trial [Abstract]. Critical Care (London,England). BioMed Central Ltd, 2013; Vol. 17:S55-6. [CENTRAL:856471; CRS: 4900100000076318; EMBASE: 71030447]Thill 1998 {published data only}Thill PJ, Baden HP, Green TP. The use of bilevel positive airwaypressure in children with obstructive airways disease. Pediatrics1998;102(3):696. [CENTRAL: 416765; CRS: 4900100000014021;4900100000014021]Webber 1982 {published data only}Webber BA, Collins JV, Branthwaite MA. Severe acute asthma:a comparison of three methods of inhaling salbutamol. BritishJournal of Diseases of the Chest 1982;76(1):69-74. [CENTRAL:258684; CRS: 4900100000007825; PUBMED: 7037036]Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews References to ongoing studiesNCT01497691 {unpublished data only}NCT01497691. Noninvasive positive airway pressure in thepediatric emergency department for the treatment of acuteasthma exacerbations.  (accessed 22 September 2016).NCT02347462 {unpublished data only}NCT02347462. Bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) for thetreatment of moderate to severe acute asthma exacerbations. (accessed 22September 2016). Additional references
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Australia's Health2010.  (accessed 30 September 2015).Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Bailey C, Zahran HS, King M,Johnson CA, et al. Trends in asthma prevalence, health care use,and mortality in the United States, 2001-2010. NCHS Data Brief2012;94:1-8. [PUBMED: 22617340]Akingbola 2002Akingbola OA, Simakajornboon N, Hadley Jr EF, Hopkins RL.Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation in pediatric statusasthmaticus. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 2002;3(2):181-4.[PUBMED: 12780991]Aldrich TK, Hendler JM, Vizioli LD, Park M, Multz AS, Shapiro SM.Intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure in ambulatorypatients with airways obstruction. The American Review ofRespiratory Disease 1993;147(4):845-9. [PUBMED: 8466118]Alith MB, Gazzotti MR, Montealegre F, Fish J, Nascimento OA,Jardim JR. Negative impact of asthma on patients in diferentage groups. Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia 2015;41(1):16-22.[PUBMED: 25750670]Alnaji F, Zemek R, Barrowman N, Plint A. PRAM score aspredictor of pediatric asthma hospitalization. AcademicEmergency Medicine 2014;21(8):872-8. [PUBMED: 25176153]Andersen JB, Qvist J, Kann T. Recruiting collapsed lung throughcollateral channels with positive end-expiratory pressure.Scandinavian Journal of Respiratory Diseases 1979;60(5):260-6.[PUBMED: 392747]
Asher I, Pearce N. Global burden of asthma among children.International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease2014;18(11):1269-78. [PUBMED: 25299857]Bahadori K, Doyle-Waters MM, Marra C, Lynd L, Alasaly K,Swiston J, et al. Economic burden of asthma: a systematicreview. BMC Pulmonary Medicine 2009;9:24. [PUBMED:19454036]Beers SL, Abramo TJ, Bracken A, Wiebe RA. Bilevel positiveairway pressure in the treatment of status asthmaticusin pediatrics. American Journal of Emergency Medicine2007;25(1):6-9. [PUBMED: 17157675]Begg CB, Mazumdar M. Operating characteristics of arank correlation test for publication bias. Biometrics1994;50(4):1088-101. [PUBMED: 7786990]Bisgaard H, Bonnelykke K, Sleiman PM, Brasholt M, Chawes B,Kreiner-Moller E, et al. Chromosome 17q21 gene variants areassociated with asthma and exacerbations but not atopy inearly childhood. American Journal of Respiratory and CriticalCare Medicine 2009;179(3):179-85. [PUBMED: 19029000]Blanch L, Bernabe F, Lucangelo U. Measurement of air trapping,intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure, and dynamichyperinflation in mechanically ventilated patients. RespiratoryCare 2005;50(1):110-23; discussion 123-4. [PUBMED: 15636649]Bloemen K, Verstraelen S, Van Den Heuvel R, Witters H,Nelissen I, Schoeters G. The allergic cascade: review of the mostimportant molecules in the asthmatic lung. Immunology Letters2007;113(1):6-18. [PUBMED: 17765979]Bloom B, Jones LI, Freeman G. No. 258. Summary healthstatistics for U.S. children: National Health Interview Survey,2012 (Series 10. Data From the National Health InterviewSurvey).  (accessed 30 September 2015). [PUBMED:24784481]
Boldrini R, Fasano L, Nava S. Noninvasive mechanicalventilation. Current Opinion in Critical Care 2012;18(1):48-53.[PUBMED: 22186215]Braman SS. The global burden of asthma. Chest 2006;130(1Suppl):4S-12S. [PUBMED: 16840363]Brannan JD, Lougheed MD. Airway hyperresponsiveness inasthma: mechanisms, clinical significance, and treatment.Frontiers in Physiology 2012;3:460. [PUBMED: 23233839]Bratton SL, Newth CJ, Zuppa AF, Moler FW, Meert KL, Berg RA,et al. Critical care for pediatric asthma: wide care variabilityNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsand challenges for study. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine2012;13(4):407-14. [PUBMED: 22067984]Brochard L, Rauss A, Benito S, Conti G, Mancebo J, Rekik N,et al. Comparison of three methods of gradual withdrawalfrom ventilatory support during weaning from mechanicalventilation. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical CareMedicine 1994;150(4):896-903. [PUBMED: 7921460]Brochard L. Noninvasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure.JAMA 2002;288(8):932-5. [PUBMED: 12190351]Brok J, Thorlund K, Gluud C, Wetterslev J. Trial sequentialanalysis reveals insuficient information size and potentiallyfalse positive results in many meta-analyses. Journal of ClinicalEpidemiology 2008;61(8):763-9. [PUBMED: 18411040]Brok J, Thorlund K, Wetterslev J, Gluud C. Apparently conclusivemeta-analyses may be inconclusive. Trial sequential analysisadjustment of random error risk due to repetitive testingof accumulating data in apparently conclusive neonatalmeta-analyses. International Journal of Epidemiology2009;38(1):287-98. [PUBMED: 18824466]Broux R, Foidart G, Mendes P, Saad G, Fatemi M, D'Orio V,et al. Use of PEEP in management of life-threatening statusasthmaticus: a method for the recovery of appropriateventilation-perfusion ratio. Applied CardiopulmonaryPathophysiology 1991;4(1):79-83. [PUBMED: 10147542]Buda AJ, Pinsky MR, Ingels NB Jr, Daughters GT 2nd,Stinson EB, Alderman EL. Efect of intrathoracic pressure onlef ventricular performance. New England Journal of Medicine1979;301(9):453-9. [PUBMED: 460363]
Caramez MP, Borges JB, Tucci MR, Okamoto VN, Carvalho CR,Kacmarek RM, et al. Paradoxical responses to positive end-expiratory pressure in patients with airway obstructionduring controlled ventilation. Critical Care Medicine2005;33(7):1519-28. [PUBMED: 16003057]Carroll CL, Sala KA. Pediatric status asthmaticus. Critical CareClinics 2013;29(2):153-66. [PUBMED: 23537669]Cave AJ, Atkinson LL. Asthma in preschool children: a reviewof the diagnostic challenges. Journal of the American Board ofFamily Medicine 2014;27(4):538-48. [PUBMED: 25002008]Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. Most Recent AsthmaData.  2013(accessed 30 September 2015).Chalut DS, Ducharme FM, Davis GM. The Preschool RespiratoryAssessment Measure (PRAM): a responsive index of acuteasthma severity. Journal of Pediatrics 2000;137(6):762-8.[PUBMED: 11113831]de Freitas 2013de Freitas D, Gomes EL, Costa D, Germano SM, Borges PV,Sampaio LMM. Efects of CPAP on clinical variables andautonomic modulation in children during an asthma attack.Respiratory Physiology & Neurobiology 2013;188(1):66-70.DeMets DL. Methods of combining randomized trials: strengthand limitations. Statistics in Medicine 1987;6(3):341-50.
DerSimonian 1986DerSimonian R, Laird N. Meta-analysis in clinical trials.Controlled Clinical Trials 1986;7(3):177-88.Dijk FN, de Jongste JC, Postma DS, Koppelman GH. Geneticsof onset of asthma. Current Opinion in Allergy and ClinicalImmunology 2013;13(2):193-202. [PUBMED: 23407123]Douwes J, Pearce N. Asthma and the westernization 'package'.International Journal of Epidemiology 2002;31(6):1098-102.[PUBMED: 12540698]Ducharme FM, Chalut D, Plotnick L, Savdie C, Kudirka D,Zhang X, et al. The Pediatric Respiratory AssessmentMeasure: a valid clinical score for assessing acute asthmaseverity from toddlers to teenagers. The Journal of Pediatrics2008;152(4):476-80, 480.e1. [PUBMED: 18346499]Egger M, Davey Smith G, Schneider M, Minder C. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. BMJ (ClinicalResearch Ed.) 1997;315(7109):629-34. [PUBMED: 9310563]Esteban A, Frutos F, Tobin MJ, Alia I, Solsona JF, Valverdu I, etal. A comparison of four methods of weaning patients frommechanical ventilation. Spanish Lung Failure CollaborativeGroup. New England Journal of Medicine 1995;332(6):345-50.[PUBMED: 7823995]Fagon JY, Chastre J, Hance AJ, Montravers P, Novara A, Gibert C.Nosocomial pneumonia in ventilated patients: a cohort studyevaluating attributable mortality and hospital stay. AmericanJournal of Medicine 1993;94(3):281-8. [PUBMED: 8452152]Finder J. Atelectasis in children.  2014 (accessed 30 September2015).Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsGalli SJ, Tsai M, Piliponsky AM. The development of allergicinflammation. Nature 2008;454(7203):445-54. [PUBMED:18650915]Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention, GlobalInitiative for Asthma (GINA) 2015.  Report_ 2015_ Aug11.pdf (accessed 30September 2015).
Gluud LL. Bias in clinical intervention research. AmericanJournal of Epidemiology 2006;163(6):493-501. [PUBMED:16443796]Graham AS, Chandrashekharaiah G, Citak A, Wetzel RC,Newth CJL. Positive end-expiratory pressure and pressuresupport in peripheral airways obstruction. Intensive CareMedicine 2007;33(1):120-7.Guerin C, Girard R, Chemorin C, De Varax R, Fournier G.Facial mask noninvasive mechanical ventilation reducesthe incidence of nosocomial pneumonia. A prospectiveepidemiological survey from a single ICU. Intensive CareMedicine 1997;23(10):1024-32. [PUBMED: 9407237]Gupta D, Nath A, Agarwal R, Behera D. A prospectiverandomized controlled trial on the eficacy of noninvasiveventilation in severe acute asthma. Respiratory Care2010;55(5):536-43. [PUBMED: 20420722]Harbord RM, Egger M, Sterne JA. A modified test for small-study efects in meta-analyses of controlled trials with binaryendpoints. Statistics in Medicine 2006;25(20):3443-57. [PUBMED:16345038]Hasegawa K, Tsugawa Y, Brown DF, Camargo CA Jr. Childhoodasthma hospitalizations in the United States, 2000-2009.The Journal of Pediatrics 2013;163(4):1127-33.e3. [PUBMED:23769497]Hedlin G, Konradsen J, Bush A. An update on paediatric asthma.European Respiratory Review 2012;21(125):175-85. [PUBMED:22941882]Hemkens LG, Contopoulos-Ioannidis DG, Ioannidis JP.Agreement of treatment efects for mortality from routinelycollected data and subsequent randomized trials: meta-epidemiological survey. BMJ (Clinical research ed.)2016;352:i493. [PUBMED: 26858277]
Higgins JP, Thompson SG. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. Statistics in Medicine 2002;21(11):1539-58.Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuringinconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)2003;327(7414):557-60. [PUBMED: 12958120]Higgins JPT, Green S (editors). Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1 [updated March2011]. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. www.cochrane-handbook.org.ICH-GCP 1997. International Conference on Harmonisation;Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guideline; Availability. (accessed 22 September 2016). [PUBMED:11656783]Jackson DJ, Evans MD, Gangnon RE, Tisler CJ, Pappas TE,Lee WM, et al. Evidence for a causal relationship betweenallergic sensitization and rhinovirus wheezing in early life.American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine2012;185(3):281-5. [PUBMED: 21960534]Jacob C, Bechtel B, Engel S, Kardos P, Linder R, Braun S, etal. Healthcare costs and resource utilization of asthma inGermany: a claims data analysis. European Journal of HealthEconomics 2015;epub ahead of print:1-7. [DOI: 10.1007/s10198-015-0671-3]Jakobsen JC, Gluud C. The necessity of randomized clinicaltrials. British Journal of Medicine & Medical Research2013;3(4):1453-68.Jakobsen JC, Wetterslev J, Winkel P, Lange T, Gluud C.Thresholds for statistical and clinical significance in systematicreviews with meta-analytic methods. BMC Medical ResearchMethodology 2014;14:120. [PUBMED: 25416419]
Jobe AH, Tibboel D. Update in pediatric lung disease 2013.American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine2014;189(9):1031-6. [PUBMED: 24787065]Keenan SP, Mehta S. Noninvasive ventilation for patientspresenting with acute respiratory failure: the randomizedcontrolled trials. Respiratory Care 2009;54(1):116-26. [PUBMED:19111111]Kjaergard 2001Kjaergard LL, Villumsen J, Gluud C. Reported methodologicquality and discrepancies between large and smallNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsrandomized trials in meta-analyses. Annals of Internal Medicine2001;135(11):982-9. [PUBMED: 11730399]Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster J. Robbins & Cotran Pathologic Basisof Disease. 8th Edition. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009.Lim WJ, Mohammed Akram R, Carson KV, Mysore S,Labiszewski NA, Wedzicha JA, et al. Non-invasive positivepressure ventilation for treatment of respiratory failuredue to severe acute exacerbations of asthma. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 12. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD004360.pub4]Lin HC, Wang CH, Yang CT, Huang TJ, Yu CT, Shieh WB, etal. Efect of nasal continuous positive airway pressure onmethacholine-induced bronchoconstriction. RespiratoryMedicine 1995;89(2):121-8. [PUBMED: 7708996]Liu M. Pathogenesis of Asthma.  2014 (accessed 30 September2015).Lundh A, Sismondo S, Lexchin J, Busuioc OA, Bero L.Industry sponsorship and research outcome. CochraneDatabase of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 12. [DOI:10.1002/14651858.MR000033.pub2]Malmstrom 2001
Malmstrom K, Kaila M, Korhonen K, Dunder T, Nermes M,Klaukka T, et al. Mechanical ventilation in children with severeasthma. Pediatric Pulmonology 2001;31(6):405-11. [PUBMED:11389571]Mantzouranis 2014Mantzouranis E, Papadopouli E, Michailidi E. Childhood asthma:recent developments and update. Current Opinion in PulmonaryMedicine 2014;20(1):8-16. [PUBMED: 24240439]Martin JG, Shore S, Engel LA. Efect of continuous positiveairway pressure on respiratory mechanics and pattern ofbreathing in induced asthma. American Review of RespiratoryDisease 1982;126(5):812-7. [PUBMED: 6216839]Masoli M, Fabian D, Holt S, Beasley R. The global burdenof asthma: executive summary of the GINA DisseminationCommittee report. Allergy 2004;59(5):469-78. [PUBMED:15080825]Mayordomo-Colunga 2011Mayordomo-Colunga J, Medina A, Rey C, Concha A, Menendez S,Arcos ML, et al. Non-invasive ventilation in pediatric statusasthmaticus: a prospective observational study. PediatricPulmonology 2011;46(10):949-55. [PUBMED: 21520437]Moher D, Pham B, Jones A, Cook DJ, Jadad AR, Moher M, et al.Does quality of reports of randomised trials afect estimatesof intervention eficacy reported in meta-analyses?. Lancet1998;352(9128):609-13. [PUBMED: 9746022]
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaf J, Altman DG, PRISMA Group.Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews andmeta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Journal of ClinicalEpidemiology 2009;62(10):1006-12.Moloney E, Kiely JL, McDonnell T, McNicholas WT. Nocturnalnasal intermittent positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) therapyfor chronic respiratory failure: long-term efects. Irish MedicalJournal 1999;92(6):401-3. [PUBMED: 10598422]National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (US). Expert PanelReport 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management ofAsthma.  2007 (accessed 30 September 2015).Nourdine K, Combes P, Carton MJ, Beuret P, Cannamela A,Ducreux JC. Does noninvasive ventilation reduce the ICUnosocomial infection risk? A prospective clinical survey.Intensive Care Medicine 1999;25(6):567-73. [PUBMED: 10416907]Papadopoulos 2012Papadopoulos NG, Arakawa H, Carlsen KH, Custovic A, Gern J,Lemanske R, et al. International consensus on (ICON) pediatricasthma. Allergy 2012;67(8):976-97. [PUBMED: 22702533]Pavone M, Verrillo E, Caldarelli V, Ullmann N, Cutrera R. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation in children. Early HumanDevelopment 2013;89 Suppl 3:S25-31. [PUBMED: 23958409]Pepe PE, Marini JJ. Occult positive end-expiratory pressurein mechanically ventilated patients with airflow obstruction:the auto-PEEP efect. American Review of Respiratory Disease1982;126(1):166-70. [PUBMED: 7046541]
Review Manager 2014 [Computer program]The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration.Review Manager (RevMan). Version 5.3. Copenhagen: TheNordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014.Savovic J, Jones HE, Altman DG, Harris RJ, Juni P, Pildal J,et al. Influence of reported study design characteristics onintervention efect estimates from randomized, controlledtrials. Annals of Internal Medicine 2012;157(6):429-38. [PUBMED:22945832]Sawicki G. Acute asthma exacerbations in children: inpatientmanagement. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsasthma-exacerbations-in-children-inpatient-management(accessed 4 September 2014).Sawicki G, Haven K. Acute asthma exacerbations in children:home/ofice management and severity assessment.  30 September 2015).Scarfone RJ. Acute asthma exacerbations in children:emergency department management.  (accessed 25January 2016).Shivaram U, Donath J, Khan FA, Juliano J. Efects of continuouspositive airway pressure in acute asthma. Respiration;International Review of Thoracic Diseases 1987;52(3):157-62.[PUBMED: 3326082]Silva PS, Barreto SS. Noninvasive ventilation in statusasthmaticus in children: levels of evidence [Ventilacaomecanica nao invasiva na crise de asma aguda grave emcriancas: niveis de evidencias.]. Revista Brasileira de terapiaintensiva 2015;27(4):390-6. [PUBMED: 26761478]Teague WG. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation: currentstatus in paediatric patients. Paediatric Respiratory Reviews2005;6(1):52-60. [PUBMED: 15698817]Thorlund K, Devereaux PJ, Wetterslev J, Guyatt G, Ioannidis JP,Thabane L, et al. Can trial sequential monitoring boundariesreduce spurious inferences from meta-analyses?. InternationalJournal of Epidemiology 2009;38(1):276-86. [PUBMED:18824467]
Thorlund K, Anema A, Mills E. Interpreting meta-analysisaccording to the adequacy of sample size. An example usingisoniazid chemoprophylaxis for tuberculosis in purifiedprotein derivative negative HIV-infected individuals. ClinicalEpidemiology 2010;2:57-66. [PUBMED: 20865104]Thorlund K, Engstrom J, Wetterslev J, Brok J, Imberger G,Gluud C. User manual for Trial Sequential Analysis (TSA), 2011.ctu.dk/tsa/files/tsa_manual.pdf (accessed 7 January 2015).Copenhagen Trial Unit. TSA - Trial Sequential Analysis, 2011.ctu.dk/tsa/ (accessed 7 January 2015).Tzoufi M, Mentzelopoulos SD, Roussos C, Armaganidis A.The efects of nebulized salbutamol, external positive end-expiratory pressure, and their combination on respiratorymechanics, hemodynamics, and gas exchange in mechanicallyventilated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients.Anesthesia and Analgesia 2005;101(3):843-50, table of contents.[PUBMED: 16116002]Wade A, Chang C. Evaluation and treatment of critical asthmasyndrome in children. Clinical Reviews in Allergy & Immunology2015;48(1):66-83. [PUBMED: 24488329]Wang CH, Lin HC, Huang TJ, Yang CT, Yu CT, Kuo HP. Diferentialefects of nasal continuous positive airway pressure onreversible or fixed upper and lower airway obstruction.European Respiratory Journal 1996;9(5):952-9. [PUBMED:8793457]Wetterslev J, Thorlund K, Brok J, Gluud C. Trial sequentialanalysis may establish when firm evidence is reached incumulative meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology2008;61(1):64-75. [PUBMED: 18083463]Wetterslev J, Thorlund K, Brok J, Gluud C. Estimating requiredinformation size by quantifying diversity in random-efectsmodel meta-analyses. BMC Medical Research Methodology2009;9:86. [PUBMED: 20042080]
Williams AM, Abramo TJ, Shah MV, Miller RA, Burney-Jones C,Rooks S, et al. Safety and clinical findings of BiPAP utilization inchildren 20 kg or less for asthma exacerbations. Intensive CareMedicine 2011;37(8):1338-43. [PUBMED: 21567114]Wood L, Egger M, Gluud LL, Schulz KF, Juni P, Altman DG, etal. Empirical evidence of bias in treatment efect estimates incontrolled trials with diferent interventions and outcomes:meta-epidemiological study. BMJ (Clinical research ed.)2008;336(7644):601-5. [PUBMED: 18316340]Yoo Y, Perzanowski MS. Allergic sensitization and theenvironment: latest update. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports2014;14(10):465. [PUBMED: 25149167] References to other published versions of this reviewKorang SK, Feinberg J, Wetterslev J, Jakobsen Janus C. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma inchildren. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. John Wiley& Sons, Ltd, 2016, issue 1. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD012067;CD012067] Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsC H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E SCharacteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID] MethodsRandomised clinical trial, PICU, St. John's Children's Hospital (Springfield, IL), January 2009 to January2010Participants20 hospitalised children with known history of asthma admitted to the paediatric intensive care unitwith status asthmaticus
Male:Female = 11:9, mean age = 6 years (range, 3-11 years)Exclusion criteria: participants with no previous history of asthma, absence of airway-protective re-flexes, absence of respiratory drive, need for emergent intubation as determined by the attendingphysician, facial or airway anomaly or injury precluding use of a tight-fitting maskSide effects: (minor) nasal bridge pain and skin irritation, gastric insufflations, sinus and ear pain, dryeyes, (major) hypotension, pneumothorax, aspiration pneumonia. Need for adjunct therapyNotesStudy authors were contacted on 19/2-2016 by email and no response was re-ceived.Unclear riskNot describedUnclear riskInvestigators used independent observers - bedside respiratory therapists - toapply the scoring system, but it was unclear whether they were blinded to theintervention.Unclear riskAlthough study authors used intention-to-treat data in a secondary analysis,and it would seem they have no missing data, they did not report the meanNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAll outcomeswhen including the missing participant, giving the trial a 10% drop-out rate inthe experimental group.Unclear riskNo protocol could be obtained, and the trial did not report mortality.Basnet 2012  (Continued)  
MethodsRandomised clinical cross-over trial, Children's Memorial Hospital Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (Chica-go, IL)Participants20 hospitalised children with lower airway obstruction characterised by increased work of breathing,wheezing and dyspnoea, and a CAS > 3Male:Female = unknown, mean age = 6 years (range, 0-11 years)Exclusion criteria: presence of a tracheostomy tube, absence of airway protective reflexes, need foremergent intubation as determined by the attending physician, facial or airway anomaly or injury pre-cluding use of a tight-fitting mask, CAS > 8, discretion of the attending physicianInterventionsExperimental group: received 2 hours of NPPV. NPPV was administered with a bilevel positive air-way pressure ventilation S/T machine via a tight-fitting nasal mask, fitted and held in place with headstraps. If an appropriately sized nasal mask was not available, a full-facemask was used.NPPV was initiated in spontaneous mode without a backup rate, with inspiratory positive airway pres-sure of 10 cm H2O and expiratory positive airway pressure of 5 cm H2O; settings remained unchangedthroughout the course of the study period.Control group: conventional therapyCo-interventions: All participants received conventional therapy for lower airway obstruction at thediscretion of the attending physician, including supplemental oxygen via a high-flow Venturi mask sys-tem, with FiO2 titrated by oxygen blender, inhaled beta2-agonists (continuous nebulized albuterol, 10mg/h) and intravenous corticosteroids (methylprednisolone, 1 to 2 mg/kg). No therapy was withdrawnoradded during the study period.OutcomesMortality, respiratory rate, Clinical Asthma Score (score: 0 to 9), oxygen saturation, transcutaneous CO2,adverse events, participant experience with NPPV
NotesStudy authors were contacted on and information regarding randomisation andserious adverse events was obtained.Risk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion (selection bias)Unclear riskThe randomisation process to determine whether to start on or of BiPAP wasdone with slips of paper drawn at random from an envelope.Allocation concealment(selection bias)Unclear riskNot describedNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsBlinding of participantsand personnel (perfor-mance bias) All outcomesHigh riskNo blinding of participants or personnelBlinding of outcome as-sessment (detection bias) All outcomesUnclear riskNot described
High riskFour participants dropped out and were not accounted for in the analysis.Selective reporting (re-porting bias)Low riskNo protocol was found, but the trial reported on serious adverse events andmortality.Other biasLow riskNo outside funding; labor was provided by the investigators, and computerand technical assistance through the resources of my Pediatric Critical Carefellowship programme and Northwestern University's Childrens MemorialHospital (now Lurie Childrens). No additional biases were observed.Thill 2004  (Continued)BiPAP: bilateral positive airway pressure.CAS: Clinical Asthma Score.FiO2: fraction of inspired oxygen.NPPV: non-positive pressure ventilation.PICU: paediatric intensive care unit. Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID] Andersen 1982The age of participants was unclear. No mention of children. Not able to contact study authorsAnderson 1982Participants were adults.Archis 2001Participants did not have asthma. No mention of childrenAron 1999Participants were adults.Bahera 2007Participants were adults.Basnet 2010Not randomisedBrandao 2009Participants were adults.Brandao 2009aParticipants were adults.Branscomb 1982Participants were adults.
Chaudhry 2010Participants were adults.Christensen 1993Participants were adults.Compagnoni 2000No NPPVNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudyReason for exclusionCross 2003Participants were adults.de Miranda 2004Participants were adults.Fergusson 1983Participants included adults and children with life-threatening asthma. However, we were unableto extract separate data for the children, and it was not possible to establish contact with study au-thors.Ferrari 2007The age of participants was unclear. No mention of childrenFilho 2009The age of participants was unclear. No mention of childrenFrischknecht 1991Participants were adults.Hanekom 2012Participants were adults.Holbrook 2016Participants were not hospitalised and were asthmatic participants in a chronic stable state.Parkes 1997Participants were asthmatic patients in a chronic stable state.Rondinel 2015Participants were adults.Soma 2002Not randomisedSoma 2008Participants were adults.Soroksky 2003Participants were adults.Thill 1998Not a randomised trialWebber 1982Participants were adults. Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID] Trial name or titleNoninvasive Positive Airway Pressure in the Pediatric Emergency Department for the Treatment ofAcute Asthma ExacerbationsParticipants*2 to 18 years old*For participants 3 years of age and older, a known history of asthma as diagnosed by the PCP orper the Vanderbilt problem listNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*For children 2 to 3 years of age, 4 or more episodes of wheezing in the past year that lasted longerthan 1 day and affected sleep AND one of the following: parental history of asthma, physiciandiagnosis of atopic dermatitis or evidence of sensitisation to aeroallergens*Acute asthma exacerbation*PAS >= 8*Parents willing and able to sign consent*Children over the age of 6 willing to provide assentInterventionsIntervention group will receive all standard of care therapies as per the paediatric EDAsthma Severity Protocol. All nebulised treatments will be given via the NIPPV/BiPAP machine. Set-tings will be adjusted on the basis of age and clinical presentation of the child.*Change in Pediatric Asthma Score*Volumetric end-tidal CO2 trend*Respiratory parameters*Cardiac output*Intubation and complication rates*Length of hospital stayStarting date2013 JanuaryContact   Trial name or titleBiPAP for the Treatment of Moderate to Severe Acute Asthma ExacerbationsMethodsRandomised clinical trialParticipants*2 to 18 years old*Admitted to BC Children's Hospital with a clinical diagnosis of an acute asthma exacerbation*PRAM score > 3 after initial treatment with 3 rounds of inhaled salbutamol and ipratropium bro-mide, and 1 dose of systemic steroid*Parents willing and able to sign consent*Children over the age of 6 willing to provide assentInterventionsChildren in the intervention group will receive BiPAP (Trilogy, Philips Respironics; spontaneoustrigger mode) via nasal mask or full facemask. EPAP will be set at 5 cm H2O. IPAP will be titrated toachieve a tidal volume of 6 to 9 mL/kg. These settings will remain unchanged throughout the studyperiod.OutcomesPrimary outcome measure*PRAM
Secondary outcome measures*Intubation and complication ratesNon-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*Hospital re-admission*Inhaled bronchodilator utilisation*Intravenous bronchodilator utilisation*Comparison of total number of hours of intravenous bronchodilator infusion received by childrenin each arm*Length of hospital stayStarting dateApril 2015Contact Notes BiPAP: bilateral positive airway pressure.ED: emergency department.EPAP: end-expiratory positive airway pressure.IPAP: inspiratory positive airway pressure.NPPV: non-positive pressure ventilation.PCP: primary care physicianPRAM: Pediatric Respiratory Assessment Measure.  D A T A   A N D   A N A L Y S E S Comparison 1.   MortalityOutcome or subgrouptitleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pants1 Mortality116Risk Difference (M-H, Random, 95% CI)0.0 [-0.21, 0.21]Study or subgroupNPPVStandard careRisk DifferenceWeightRisk Difference  Favours [NPPV]10.5-1-0.50Favours [Standard care]Statistical methodEffect size1 Serious adverse events235Risk Ratio (M-H, Random, 95% CI)0.0 [0.0, 0.0]Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews n/Nn/NM-H, Random, 95% CI M-H, Random, 95% CIThill 20040/80/8 Not estimable  Total (95% CI)1718Not estimableTotal events: 0 (NPPV), 0 (Standard care) 
Heterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Not applicable Outcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size1 Asthma symptom score in the acutephase119Mean Difference (IV, Fixed,95% CI)  Analysis 3.1.   Comparison 3 Asthma symptom score, Outcome 1 Asthma symptom score in the acute phase.Study or subgroupNPPVStandard careMean DifferenceWeightMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Fixed, 95% CI Fixed, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Z=2.22(P=0.03) Favours [NPPV]10050-100-500Favours [Standard care]Outcome or subgroup titleNo. of studiesNo. of partici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size1 Pneumonia119Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI)0.0 [0.0, 0.0]  Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 4.1.   Comparison 4 Pneumonia, Outcome 1 Pneumonia.Study or subgroupNPPVStandard careRisk RatioWeightRisk Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Fixed, 95% CI M-H, Fixed, 95% CIBasnet 20120/90/10 Not estimable  Total (95% CI)910Not estimableTotal events: 0 (NPPV), 0 (Standard care) Heterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Not applicable Favours [NPPV]1000.01100.11Favours [Standard care]
 TrialEvents in experimental groupEvents in controlgroupThill 20044 (including 2 participants with mild nasalbridge pain, 1 with redness aroundthe nose without skin breakdown and1 with dry eyes) Appendix 1. Sources and search methods for the Cochrane Airways Group Specialised Register (CAGR) DatabaseFrequency of searchCENTRAL (The Cochrane Library)MonthlyMEDLINE (Ovid)WeeklyEmbase (Ovid)WeeklyPsycINFO (Ovid)MonthlyCINAHL (EBSCO)MonthlyAMED (EBSCO)Monthly  Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsConferenceYears searchedAmerican Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI)2001 onwardsAmerican Thoracic Society (ATS)2001 onwardsAsia Pacific Society of Respirology (APSR)2004 onwardsBritish Thoracic Society Winter Meeting (BTS)2000 onwardsChest Meeting2003 onwardsEuropean Respiratory Society (ERS)1992, 1994, 2000 onwardsInternational Primary Care Respiratory Group Congress (IPCRG)2002 onwardsThoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand (TSANZ)1999 onwards Asthma search1. exp Asthma/
2. asthma$.mp.3. (antiasthma$ or anti-asthma$).mp.4. Respiratory Sounds/5. wheez$.mp.6. Bronchial Spasm/7. bronchospas$.mp.8. (bronch$ adj3 spasm$).mp.9. bronchoconstrict$.mp.10. exp Bronchoconstriction/11. (bronch$ adj3 constrict$).mp.12. Bronchial Hyperreactivity/13. Respiratory Hypersensitivity/14. ((bronchial$ or respiratory or airway$ or lung$) adj3 (hypersensitiv$ or hyperreactiv$ or allerg$ or insuficiency)).mp.15. ((dust or mite$) adj3 (allerg$ or hypersensitiv$)).mp.Filter to identify RCTs1. exp "clinical trial [publication type]"/2. (randomized or randomised).ab,ti.3. placebo.ab,ti.4. dt.fs.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews5. randomly.ab,ti.6. trial.ab,ti.7. groups.ab,ti.9. Animals/10. Humans/11. 9 not (9 and 10)The MEDLINE strategy and RCT filter are adapted to identify trials in other electronic databases.Appendix 2. Search strategy to identify relevant trials from the CAGR
#1 AST:MISC1#2 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Asthma Explode All#3 asthma*:ti,ab#4 #1 or #2 or #3#5 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Positive-Pressure Respiration Explode All#6 NPPV#7 NIPPV#8 CPAP#9 BiPAP#10 non-invasive or "non invasive"#11 positive-pressure or "positive pressure"#12 "pressure support" or pressure-support#13 "positive airway" or positive-airway#14 airway NEXT pressure or airway-pressure#15 "pressure control" or pressure-control#16 bi-level* or bilevel*#17 ventilat* NEAR3 support*#18 volume NEXT control or volume-control#19 ((nasal* OR mechanical*) NEAR3 ventilat*)#20 #5 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 or #12 or #13 or #14 or #15 or #16 or #17 or #18 or #19[Note: in search line #1, MISC1 denotes the field in the record in which the reference has been coded for condiiton, in this case, asthma]C O N T R I B U T I O N S   O F   A U T H O R SSteven Kwasi Korang (SK) conceived, designed and drafed the protocol.Joshua Feinberg (JF) provided advice and revised the protocol.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsJorn Wetterslev (JW) provided advice and revised the protocol.Janus Christian Jakobsen (JCJ) conceived, designed and revised the protocol.D E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S T
Steven Kwasi Korang has no interest to declare.Joshua Feinberg has no interest to declare.Jorn Wetterslev is a member of the task force at the Copenhagen Trial Unit convened to develop the theory and sofware of Trial SequentialAnalysis (TSA).Janus Christian Jakobsen has no interest to declare.S O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources*Copenhagen Trial Unit, Denmark.The review was conducted during work hours*Paediatric Dept, Holbaek Sygehus, Denmark.The review was conducted during work hoursExternal sources*The review authors declare that no such funding was received for this systematic review, Other.D I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E WMention of for-profit bias was included under "other biases" in the section on Assessment of risk of bias in included studies, in accordancewith the rest of the protocol.Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute asthma in children (Review)Copyright (c) 2016 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
