  Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children withcongenital heart disease (Review) CochraneLibraryCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsT A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T SPLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY.......................................................................................................................................................................2
CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES..................................................................................................................................................................19Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional management, Outcome 1 Mortality prior todischarge................................................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 1.2. Comparison 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional management, Outcome 2 Pulmonaryhypertensive crises...............................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 1.6. Comparison 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional management, Outcome 6 Diference inPaO2:FiO2 change score.......................................................................................................................................................................Analysis 1.7. Comparison 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional management, Outcome 7 Maximummethaemoglobin level..........................................................................................................................................................................CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS...................................................................................................................................................................34DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST.....................................................................................................................................................................34DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PROTOCOL AND REVIEW....................................................................................................................................34
CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews[Intervention Review]Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonaryhypertension in infants and children with congenital heart diseaseMatthew Bizzarro1, Ian Gross1, Fabiano T Barbosa21Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 2Department of Clinical Medicine, Hospital Geral doEstado Professor Osvaldo Brandao Vilela, Maceio, BrazilContact address: Matthew Bizzarro, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street WP493, P.O. Box208064, New Haven, CT, 06520-8064, USA. 
Editorial group: Cochrane Anaesthesia Group.Publication status and date: New search for studies and content updated (no change to conclusions), published in Issue 7, 2014.Citation:  Bizzarro M, Gross I, Barbosa FT. Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension ininfants and children with congenital heart disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2014, Issue 7. Art. No.: CD005055. DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD005055.pub3.Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A B S T R A C TNitric oxide (NO) is a prevalent molecule in humans that is responsible for many physiologic activities including pulmonary vasodilation.An exogenous, inhaled form (iNO) exists that mimics this action without afecting systemic blood pressure. This therapy has beenimplemented in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. This review examines the eficacy of iNO in the postoperative management ofinfants and children with congenital heart disease (CHD). The original review was published in 2005, updated in 2008 and again in 2014.ObjectivesTo compare the efects of postoperative administration of iNO versus placebo or conventional management, or both, on infants andchildren with CHD and pulmonary hypertension. The primary outcome was mortality. Secondary outcomes included length of hospitalstay; neurodevelopmental disability; number of pulmonary hypertensive crises (PHTC); changes in mean pulmonary arterial pressure(MPAP), mean arterial pressure (MAP), and heart rate (HR); changes in oxygenation measured as the ratio of arterial oxygen tension (PaO2)to fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2); and measurement of maximum methaemoglobin level as a marker of toxicity.In this updated version we extended the CENTRAL search to 2013, Issue 12 of The Cochrane Library, and MEDLINE and EMBASE through to1 December 2013. The original search was performed in July 2004 and again in November 2007. We included abstracts and all languages.
Selection criteriaWe included randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials comparing iNO with placebo or conventional management, or both. Trialsincluded only children with CHD requiring surgery complicated by pulmonary hypertension.Two authors extracted data. Data were collected on mortality; number of PHTC; changes in MPAP, MAP, HR, and PaO2:FiO2; and maximummethaemoglobin level. Data on long-term mortality, neurodevelopmental disability, and length of hospital stay were unavailable. Weperformed subgroup analysis by method of control (placebo or conventional management).Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Main resultsWe reran the searches to December 2013 and identified three new studies. These three studies did not fulfil our inclusion criteria. Therefore,no new studies were included in this updated review. In total four randomized trials involving 210 participants were included in this review.We observed no diferences in mortality (OR 1.67, 95% CI 0.38 to 7.30; P = 0.50); PHTC (OR 0.80, 95% CI 0.15 to 4.18; P = 0.79); changes inMPAP (treatment efect -2.94 mm Hg, 95% CI -9.28 to 3.40; P = 0.36), MAP (treatment efect -3.55 mm Hg, 95% CI -11.86 to 4.76; P = 0.40),HR (treatment efect 0.02 bpm, 95% CI -8.13 to 8.18; P = 1.00), or PaO2:FiO2 (mean diference 17.18, 95% CI -28.21 to 62.57; P = 0.46). Therewas a significant increase in the methaemoglobin level (mean diference 0.30%, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.36; P < 0.00001) in patients treated withiNO, although levels did not reach toxicity levels. Data from long-term mortality, neurodevelopmental disability, and length of stay werenot available. Two trials had a low risk of bias. Very low quality of the evidence was observed considering grading of the outcomes.Authors' conclusionsWe observed no diferences with the use of iNO in the outcomes reviewed. No data were available for several clinical outcomesincluding long-term mortality and neurodevelopmental outcome. We found it dificult to draw valid conclusions given concerns regardingmethodologic quality, sample size, and heterogeneity.P L A I N   L A N G U A G E   S U M M A R YInhaled nitric oxide to treat high blood pressure of the pulmonary vessels afer surgery in infants and children with congenitalheart diseaseReview questionWe reviewed the evidence on the efectiveness of inhaled nitric oxide for treatment of high blood pressure in the pulmonary vessels ininfants and children born with heart disease.
BackgroundPulmonary hypertension (PH) is an increase in blood pressure in the pulmonary vessels that afects various patient populations and cancause poor health and a significant number of deaths. PH can reduce cardiac function and precipitate a life-threatening crisis. Congenitalheart disease (CHD) is a structural deformity of the heart that exists at birth, and ofen before birth. PH may arise because of increasedpulmonary blood flow and persistent raised pulmonary arterial pressures, or following the use of cardiopulmonary bypass during surgicalrepair. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) is a therapy which causes a selective reduction in the high blood pressure of the pulmonary vessels withoutdecreasing blood pressure in the rest of the body and, therefore, may have a treatment benefit in children with heart disease. In this review,we aimed to assess the benefits and harms of using iNO for postoperative management of PH in children with CHD.Study characteristicsThe evidence was current to December 2013. We found four randomized clinical trials involving 210 participants aged from one day to17 years with PH either in the preoperative (one study) or postoperative period (three studies). Control groups received conventionalmanagement therapy (two trials) or nitrogen gas as placebo (two trials). Two trials compared changes in systemic and pulmonary arterialblood pressure and heart rate (haemodynamics). The other two trials compared the number of pulmonary hypertensive crises and deaths,with changes in haemodynamic measurements as secondary outcomes.
Key resultsWe found no diferences between the groups of patients who received iNO and those that did not. Two trials reported on deaths beforedischarge, with none occurring in one of the trials. We observed no diferences in the number of deaths (two trials); pulmonary hypertensivecrises (one trial); changes in mean pulmonary arterial pressure (three trials), arterial pressure (three trials), or heart rate (HR) (three trials);or changes in oxygenation of the blood (one trial). However, no trials reported long-term deaths or neurodevelopmental disability. Inaddition, no data were available for analysis of length of hospital stay.Although iNO has been studied as a postsurgical therapy in children with heart disease in order to assist recovery, this review showed nobenefits with its use.Two trials had a low risk of bias. The quality of the evidence was, however, very low due to the small number of participants and low eventrates. All trials utilized diferent concentrations of iNO, diferent durations of administration initiated at diferent times afer the operation,and included patients with diverse congenital heart defects necessitating repair.Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.S U M M A R Y   O F   F I N D I N G S Summary of findings for the main comparison.   Inhaled nitric oxide compared to placebo or conventional therapy for all infants and children withcongenital heart disease having postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension
Inhaled nitric oxide compared to placebo or conventional therapy for all infants and children with congenital heart disease having postoperative management ofpulmonary hypertensionPatient or population: all infants and children with congenital heart disease having postoperative management of pulmonary hypertensionSettings: postoperativeIntervention: inhaled nitric oxideComparison: placebo or conventional therapyIllustrative comparative risks* (95% CI)Assumed riskCorresponding riskPlacebo or conven-tional therapyRelativeeffect(95%CI)No of par-ticipants(studies)Quality of theevidence(GRADE)See commentSee commentNot es-timableSee commentNo studiesmet outcomedefinitionStudy populationModerateMortality prior to discharge 1 Follow-up: mean 15 days162(2 studies)very low 2,3 Difference in MPAP change score (SE) - ConventionalManagement 4 Follow-up: mean 5 days  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Difference in MPAP change score (SE) - Placebo 4 Follow-up: mean 5 daysDifference in MAP change score (SE) - ConventionalMangement 4 Follow-up: mean 5 days
See commentSee comment 4(2 studies)Difference in MAP change score (SE) - Placebo 4 Follow-up: mean 5 daysSee commentSee commentNot es-timable42(1 study)very low 6,7*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) isbased on the assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio; OR: Odds ratioGRADE Working Group grades of evidenceHigh quality: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality: We are very uncertain about the estimate.1 One of the two trials had zero events (Day 2000).2 Statistical heterogeneity could not be measured. One of the two trials had zero events (Day 2000).3 There was very low precision because of the small numbers and the low rate of events (only 162 patients and 8 events). One of the two trials had zero events (Day 2000).4 Pre-specified subgroup analysis.5 One of the two trials included was assessed as having a low risk of bias (Day 2000).6 Pre-specified subgroup analysis. Study was assessed as having high risk of bias (Russell 1998).7 Statistical heterogeneity could not be measured.8 There was very low precision because of the small numbers (only 50 patients). CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsCochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsB A C K G R O U N DDescription of the conditionThe eficacy of iNO has been extensively investigated andsubstantiated in the treatment of persistent pulmonaryhypertension of the newborn (Clark 2000; Kinsella 1992; NINOS1997; Roberts 1992; Roberts 1997). The extreme vasoreactivityof the newborn pulmonary vasculature to inhaled nitric oxide(iNO) has raised the question of whether or not iNO wouldbe an efective treatment for pulmonary hypertension in morediverse populations and clinical scenarios (Haworth 1984; Steudel1999). For example, pulmonary hypertension may arise inpatients with congenital heart disease (a structural deformityin the heart existing at birth and ofen before birth) (CHD)characterized by increased pulmonary blood flow. The increasedcirculation can potentiate remodeling of the vascular bed resultingin persistence of elevated pulmonary arterial pressure, whichaccelerates the need for operative intervention and potentiallycomplicates postoperative recovery (Atz 1997; Wessel 1993).Pulmonary hypertension can occur in about 50% of CHDcases (Gorenflo 2010). Endogenous production of nitric oxide iscompromised in the early postoperative period and the use ofcardiopulmonary bypass during surgical repair can contributeto elevated pulmonary arterial pressures through induction ofhypoxaemia, production of microemboli, and excess productionof endothelin and thromboxane (Atz 1997). These factors mayresult in acute elevations in pulmonary vascular resistance thatcan impede cardiac output and precipitate life-threatening crises(Jones 1981; Wheller 1979). These events occur postoperativelyin approximately 7% of patients with CHD, with an associatedmortality rate of about 29% (Bando 1996). As a result, researchersand clinicians have investigated the use of iNO in the postoperativemanagement of CHD as a means of reducing pulmonary vascularresistance and averting such complications.Description of the intervention
Nitric oxide is a molecule that is produced throughout thehuman body and has a diversity of physiologic actions. One ofinterest involves its role as a mediator of vasodilation. Withinvascular endothelial cells nitric oxide synthase converts L-arginineinto nitric oxide (NO). NO then difuses into vascular smoothmuscle where it binds to soluble guanylate cyclase to convertguanosine triphosphate into cyclic guanosine monophosphate(cGMP). The cGMP then mediates vascular smooth musclerelaxation (Steudel 1999). Exogenous NO in the form of iNO has asimilar mechanism of action on the pulmonary vascular bed. Aferinitiating vascular smooth muscle relaxation the molecule difusesinto the bloodstream where it binds with iron in haemoglobin toform methaemoglobin and is inactivated (Steudel 1999). Therefore,the molecule exerts virtually no vasodilatory efect on the systemiccirculation. It is this unique property of iNO that has led to theinvestigation of its use in a myriad of paediatric and adult diseasescomplicated by pulmonary hypertension (Nelin 1998).How the intervention might workIn 1994, Journois et al studied 17 infants with CHD andcritical postoperative pulmonary arterial hypertension that wasunresponsive to conventional therapies. Initiation of 20 parts permillion (ppm) of iNO resulted in a decrease in mean pulmonaryarterial pressure (MPAP) in all patients without significant changesWhy it is important to do this review
As a result of the findings described above (Beghetti 1995; Curran1995; Journois 1994; Miller 1994), several investigators undertookrandomized controlled trials (RCTs) to more efectively evaluatethe use of iNO in the treatment of pulmonary hypertensionin the immediate postoperative period for paediatric patientswith CHD. There is a clinical guideline recommending iNO forneonates with acute hypoxic respiratory failure (DiBlasi 2010).Although iNO has been recommended to treat neonates withacute hypoxaemic respiratory failure complicated by pulmonaryartery hypertension, its use in other clinical scenarios and patientpopulations, including infants and children with CHD complicatedby pulmonary hypertension, remains uncertain so this systematicreview is relevant to answer the research question: what arethe efects of postoperative iNO versus placebo or conventionalmanagement, or both, on infants and children with CHD?O B J E C T I V E STo compare the efects of postoperative administration of iNOversus placebo or conventional management, or both, on infantsand children with CHD and pulmonary hypertension. We evaluated:1. long-term mortality;2. mortality prior to hospital discharge;3. length of intensive care unit or hospital stay;4. neurodevelopmental disability (a disorder of brain functionthatafects emotion, learning ability, and memory);5. pulmonary hypertensive crises (PHTC);6. MPAP, mean arterial (systemic) pressure (MAP), and heart rate(HR);7. arterial oxygenation (the amount of oxygen in arterial blood)or saturation (non-invasive measurement of oxygen in arterialblood), or both;8. methaemoglobin level (an abnormal form of haemoglobin thatcannot bind oxygen).
We performed subgroup analysis to observe the efects of iNO bymethod of control (for example placebo versus use of conventionalmanagement).Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsM E T H O D SCriteria for considering studies for this reviewTypes of studiesWe evaluated randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-randomized controlled trials that compared the use of iNO withplacebo or conventional management strategies, or both, andincluded at least one outcome of interest. We considered bothparallel and cross-over design trials for inclusion.Types of participantsWe included infants and children aged one day to 14 years withCHD requiring surgical repair and with evidence of pulmonaryhypertension in the pre- or postoperative period. We excludedpreterm neonates.Types of interventionsWe evaluated the use of iNO at various concentrations ranging fromfive to 80 ppm when given in the postoperative period.We evaluated placebo, administered as nitrogen gas (N2), as acontrol.Conventional management included hyperventilation to inducerespiratory alkalosis, use of sodium bicarbonate to inducemetabolic alkalosis, use of intravenous inotropic and vasodilatoryagents, and use of intravenous sedatives and neuromuscularblockade in an attempt to improve pulmonary blood flow (Whittsett1999).
Types of outcome measures1. Long-term mortality2. Mortality prior to dischargeSecondary outcomes1. Length of stay in intensive care unit or hospital2. Incidence and severity of neurodevelopmental disability3. Incidence of PHTC4. Change in MPAP5. Change in MAP6. Change in HR7. Change in ratio of arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) to fraction ofinspired oxygen (FiO2)8. Maximum methaemoglobin levelElectronic searchesIn our original review we searched the Cochrane Central Registerof Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2004, Issue 3),MEDLINE (January 1966 to 1 July 2004) and EMBASE (January 1980to 1 July 2004) (Bizzarro 2005). For our first update, the search wasextended from 1 July 2004 through to 1 November 2007.In this latest updated version we searched CENTRAL through to2013, Issue 12 of The Cochrane Library, and MEDLINE and EMBASEthrough to 1 December 2013. We used filters to identify RCTs in
MEDLINE (Dickersin 1994) and EMBASE (Lefebvre 1996). We limitedthe searches to studies in humans. We did not apply any languagerestrictions during the literature search or for trial inclusion. Weincluded abstracts in this search and handsearched conferenceabstracts for relevant studies. We retrieved all eligible studies in fulltext.The strategy for CENTRAL is in Appendix 1.The strategy for MEDLINE is in Appendix 2.The strategy for EMBASE in Appendix 3.Searching other resourcesWe searched the reference lists of identified review articles and allincluded studies in an attempt to identify other potentially eligiblestudies. We undertook personal communication with primaryauthors to identify unpublished data, when necessary.Data collection and analysisSelection of studiesWe utilized the standardized methods for conducting a systematicreview as described by The Cochrane Collaboration in the CochraneHandbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0 (Higgins2011). Two authors independently read the RCTs identified throughsearching electronic databases and handsearching of journals.Using the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined above, theauthors reached consensus as to which studies were included in thereview.Data extraction and management
Two authors (MB and IG) independently extracted and collecteddata on a paper form (Appendix 4). We contacted the authorsof trials, when necessary, to obtain raw data not presented inthe trial report but necessary for the analysis. We resolved anydiscrepancies in a consensus meeting.Assessment of risk of bias in included studiesTwo authors (MB and IG) independently assessed the methodologicquality of each included trial following the guidelines describedby The Cochrane Collaboration in the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0 (Higgins 2011). A copy ofthe form that we used to do this assessment is in Appendix 4.We resolved any discrepancies in this assessment by a consensusmeeting. No third-party intervention was required. We used the'risk of bias' tool in RevMan 5.2 (RevMan 5.2). We assessed the riskof bias (when there is an error in the conduct of the trial that couldlead to a misleading result) based on the information presented inthe papers. We did not contact authors for clarification. We used thefollowing as the assessment criteria.1. Random sequence generationLow: sequence generation was reported using computer generatedrandom numbers, codes or sealed envelopes. We judged otherprocesses, such as tossing of a coin, as adequate if the wholesequence was generated prior to the start of the trial and if itwas performed by a person not otherwise involved in patientrecruitment.High: a system was used which was generated by a non-randomapproach, e.g. dates, names or identification numbers.Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibrary
Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews2. Allocation concealmentLow: if the process that was used prevented patient recruiters,investigators, and participants from knowing the interventionallocation of the next participant to be enrolled in the study.High: if the allocation method allowed the patient recruiters,investigators, or participants to know the treatment allocation ofthe next participant to be enrolled in the study.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.3. Blinding of participants and personnelLow: if participants and personnel were reported as blinded.High: if participants and personnel were not reported as blinded.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.4. Blinding of outcome assessmentLow: if outcome assessors were reported as blinded.High: if outcome assessors were not reported as blinded.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.5. Incomplete outcome data
Low: numbers of withdrawals or exclusions per group, with reasons,were provided or if the authors reported no withdrawals orexclusions.High: numbers of withdrawals or exclusions per group, withreasons, were not provided or if authors did not report reasons forwithdrawals or exclusions per group when they were evident.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.6. Selective reportingLow: if all outcomes were reported.High: if outcomes were measured but not reported or planned andnot measured.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.7. Other biasLow: if the study appeared to be free of other sources of bias notdescribed in other sections of this table.High: if the study appeared to be fraudulent or had some otherproblem not described in other sections of this table.Unclear: insuficient information was available to consider 'low' or'high' risk of bias.Measures of treatment efectWith respect to data analysis, we employed the standardizedmethods of the Cochrane Neonatal Review Group (CNRG 2004).These included, but were not limited to:1. considering which types of study design were appropriate forthe review and deciding how to address each type;2. determining the likely nature of the outcome data (that is,dichotomous, continuous, etc);3. considering whether it was possible to specify in advance whattreatment efect measures were used;4. deciding how to identify statistical heterogeneity;5. deciding whether to use random-efects meta-analyses, fixed-efect meta-analyses, or both methods;6. considering how to assess clinical and methodological diversity(heterogeneity) and whether (and how) to incorporate these intothe analysis strategy;7. deciding how to assess and address the quality of includedstudies in the analysis; and8. deciding whether (and how) to seek evidence of possiblepublication or reporting biases.
We identified pertinent data from trials of both parallel (Day 2000;Miller 2000; Russell 1998) and cross-over (Morris 2000) design.When the outcome of interest included only dichotomous data fromparallel trials, we calculated an odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidenceinterval (CI) using a fixed-efect model. When the outcome ofinterest included only continuous data from parallel trials, wecalculated a mean diference (MD) with 95% CI using a fixed-efectmodel. When the outcome of interest included data from bothparallel and cross-over trials, we employed the generic inversevariance method to analyse these combinations of data. Beforeany of these methods could be utilized, we collected and assessedindividual patient data. We collected baseline measurements ofMPAP, MAP, HR, and the ratio of PaO2:FiO2 for each individualpatient and compared them with measurements taken at thecompletion of therapy. We then calculated a mean change scorewith standard deviation for both the treatment and control groups.We calculated a reduction in any of the above outcomes frombaseline as a negative change score, whereas we calculated anincrease from baseline as a positive change score. Individualpatient data were available from Russell 1998 and Morris 2000;and we obtained data direct from the authors of Day 2000.When necessary, we calculated MPAP from available individualpatient pulmonary systolic and diastolic pressures. In Russell1998, individual patient data were presented as the baselineMPAP of each patient and the subsequent per cent change inMPAP from baseline afer initiation of therapy. Using the per centchange from the initial MPAP, the final MPAP and change scorecould be calculated for each patient. For the change in HR andMAP in Russell 1998, we calculated a change score from theavailable baseline and post-treatment mean values. To calculatethe standard deviation (SD) we utilized the methods describedby The Cochrane Collaboration in the Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0 (Section 7.7.3.2) (Higgins2011). First, we imputed correlation coeficients for both thetreatment and control groups from Day 2000. We chose this studybecause it was most similar to Russell 1998 (the Morris 2000trial being of cross-over design). Next, we calculated the SD for
Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsboth the control and treatment group utilizing the correspondingcorrelation coeficient and the available data.Unit of analysis issuesWe did not have any unit of analysis issues.
Dealing with missing dataWe contacted the trial authors to clarify missing or unclear datawhen necessary.Assessment of heterogeneityWe performed testing for heterogeneity of treatment efect using aChi2 test. We also employed the I2 statistic and Chi2 test to measurethe degree of inconsistency among results. We considered datahighly suspicious if we identified an I2 value greater than 50% and,under these circumstances, data were reanalysed using a random-efects model.Assessment of reporting biasesWe planned to assess publication bias using a funnel plot (Higgins2011) if more than nine studies were included in the meta-analysis.The funnel plot has an inverted funnel shape if publication bias isabsent; funnel plots are examined visually and through Egger's testto test asymmetry.Data synthesisIn order to combine and analyse data from both parallel and cross-over trials, we first calculated treatment efects and 95% CIs forboth the continuous and dichotomous data. For continuous data,we calculated an MD with 95% CI using a fixed-efect model foreach outcome described. For dichotomous data, we calculated anOR with 95% CI using a fixed-efect model. Next, we calculated astandard error (SE) for each outcome of interest using the 95% CIand a value from the t-distribution as described in the CochraneHandbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0 (Section7.7.7.2) (Higgins 2011). Now, with the available treatment efect andSE for each outcome of interest, we could enter data into the genericinverse variance model for analysis. We entered dichotomous datapresented in the form of an OR as logarithms as described in theCochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0(Section 7.7.2) (Higgins 2011). Because the generic inverse variance
model output omits the number of data points contributed by eachtrial, we have included this information in the 'Additional tables'section of the review (see Table 1; Table 2; Table 3;). We performedthe analysis in RevMan 5.2 (RevMan 5.2).Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneityWe planned to do subgroup analysis based on method of controlas described above in the Objectives (placebo or conventionalmanagement).We estimated statistical heterogeneity through the Chi2 test and I2statistic. Potential sources of heterogeneity among these studiesincluded diferential exposure intensity (for example dosing of iNOand length of treatment), diferential treatment of control groups(for example placebo versus conventional management), and hostfactors (for example age, type of underlying cardiac disease). Weplanned to explore some of these via subgroup analysis.We performed sensitivity analyses, when possible, by excludingtrials of lower methodologic quality and reanalysing the data.R E S U L T SDescription of studiesThe details concerning each individual study are addressed in thetables Characteristics of included studies and Characteristics ofexcluded studies.
Results of the searchIn our original review we identified six trials that were relevantto our topic of interest (Bizzarro 2005). We included four RCTsin the review (Day 2000; Miller 2000; Morris 2000; Russell 1998)and excluded two studies (Argenziano 1998; Matsui 1997). Inour first update (search to November 2007) we identified tworelevant studies and excluded both (Khazin 2004; Smith 2006).For this updated search (from November 2007 to 1 December2013) we excluded 49 studies considering the inclusion criteria andidentified three additional relevant trials (Checchia 2013; Kirbas2012; Loukhanov 2011) but none met out inclusion criteria. For asummary of the search see Figure 1. Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 Included studiesThree of the trials were of parallel design (Day 2000; Miller 2000;Russell 1998) while the fourth employed a cross-over design (Morris2000). However, using the recommendations from The CochraneCollaboration for evaluation of a cross-over trial (Alderson 2002),the authors concluded that the inclusion of this study into thereview was valid. The details of the participants and interventionscan be found in the table Characteristics of included studies.Each of the four trials included in the review evaluated theuse of postoperative iNO in infants and children with CHDnecessitating repair. All included participants were identified ashaving pulmonary hypertension either in the preoperative orpostoperative period. In three of the studies (Day 2000; Morris 2000;Russell 1998) postoperative pulmonary hypertension was used asa criterion either for inclusion or for a separate subgroup analysis.One of the RCTs (Miller 2000) utilized preoperative diagnosis aspart of the entry criteria into the trial but did not comment on thepresence or absence of postoperative pulmonary hypertension inindividual included participants.
In each RCT children were the primary patient population studied.Russell 1998 included 35 patients aged 2 days to 6.5 years. Day 2000included 44 patients aged 1 day to 20 years (and 2 adults). Morris2000 included 12 patients with an age range from 1 month to 17years (1 adult). Miller 2000 did not specifically list the age rangeof their patient population but instead commented on inclusionof 124 patients with a median age of 3 months in the treatmentgroup and 2 months in the control group. We excluded data on adultpatients (defined as greater than or equal to 17 years of age) fromthe analysis.The RCTs difered with respect to the method of treatment utilizedin the control groups. Day 2000 compared the use of iNO with'conventional treatment' in the control group. No strict criteriaInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsor definition of 'conventional management' were utilized in thistrial and management of the control group was instead lef tothe discretion of the attending cardiothoracic surgeon. Morris2000 employed a cross-over method with patients randomizedto receive either iNO in the treatment group or hyperventilationas the treatment comparison in the control group (ofen part ofthe conventional management protocol). This trial utilized a 30-minute washout period between treatments. With the exceptionof the intervention, patient management was similar in bothgroups. Russell 1998 and Miller 2000 initiated iNO in the treatmentgroup versus placebo in the control group, although underlyingconventional therapies (such as hyperventilation and the use ofinotropes) were maintained in both groups.
The trials also difered with respect to onset and duration of iNOtherapy in the postoperative period. Russell 1998 initiated iNO orplacebo therapy immediately afer patients were removed fromcardiopulmonary bypass and continued treatment for a total of 20minutes. Day 2000 initiated therapy upon the patient's arrival in theintensive care unit (ICU) and continued treatment until extubation,although data collection occurred at one hour afer initiation oftherapy. Morris 2000 used a cross-over study design comparing iNOwith hyperventilation. Treatment was initiated at a mean of 8.5hours postoperation (range 4 to 40 hours) and each treatment wasgiven for a period of 30 minutes. Miller 2000 initiated therapy justafer completion of surgery and continued iNO or placebo for amaximum of seven days.The concentration of iNO utilized also difered among studies.Russell 1998 initiated iNO at 80 ppm while Day 2000 initiated20 ppm. Morris 2000 initiated a 5 ppm concentration of iNO for15 minutes and then 40 ppm for the remaining 15 minutes oftreatment (although data were presented only for outcomes on 40ppm). Miller 2000 initiated iNO at 10 ppm and continued the use ofthis concentration throughout the duration of the study.Miller 2000 compared changes in haemodynamic measurements assecondary outcomes of interest.Data presentation difered among the RCTs included in this review.Russell 1998 and Morris 2000 presented individual data whereasDay 2000 and Miller 2000 presented group data. Individual datawere collected from Dr Ronald Day so that certain outcomesof interest, specifically MPAP and MAP, could be calculated andincluded. With respect to Miller 2000, most data were presented asgroup data in the form of median values and interquartile ranges.We thus assumed that the data were skewed, making it dificult tocalculate the necessary means and SDs required for inclusion in theanalysis. Attempts to obtain the data from the authors in a form thatcould be utilized were unsuccessful.
Excluded studiesWe excluded seven studies during the review process. Of theexcluded studies, Matsui 1997 was listed in CENTRAL but wasnot an RCT; Argenziano 1998 was an RCT on the topic ofinterest but utilized only an adult patient population; Khazin2004 compared iNO with milrinone, not placebo or conventionalmanagement, and analysed the combined efects of the two agentson pulmonary hypertension in the patient population of interestfor this review; Smith 2006 compared citrulline, an NO precursor,with placebo in the patient population of interest. Loukhanov 2011and Kirbas 2012 compared the efects of iNO versus aerosolizediloprost on pulmonary hypertension in the patient populationof interest within the first 72 hours post-bypass. Checchia 2013compared the efects of iNO versus placebo delivered to themembrane oxygenator only during cardiopulmonary bypass inchildren undergoing repair of tetralogy of Fallot. The details of allexclusions can be found in Characteristics of excluded studies.Risk of bias in included studiesWe included randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials inthis review (Characteristics of included studies). The bias domainsare presented in the 'risk of bias' summary figure and in the 'risk ofbias' graph (Figure 2 and Figure 3). Two studies had low risk of bias(Day 2000; Miller 2000). We assessed methodological quality basedon the following criteria. Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews  Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 AllocationRussell 1998 and Morris 2000 did not list specific techniques forrandomization. Day 2000 employed a "blind draw from sequentialgroups containing six assignments". No further detail was givenas to who, the investigators or a separate participant, actuallyperformed the draw and assignment. Finally, Miller 2000 employeda computer-based randomization program to assign patients to thetreatment or control group.Concealment of allocation was adequate in Miller 2000 andDay 2000 as blinding of randomization was likely to have beenpreserved through the methods of randomization. Concealmentwas unclear in Morris 2000 and Russell 1998 as, since no explicitdetails about methods of randomization were provided, the reviewauthors had no way of confirming whether or not concealment ofallocation was preserved.Russell 1998 described adequate blinding of treatment bystating, "The operative team (surgeons, anaesthesiologists, andechocardiographies) were blinded to the treatment assigned".Miller 2000 also described adequate blinding of treatment as thetreatment and placebo gas "were masked with locked opaquecovers" and adjusted by a non-clinical investigator. In the trialsby Morris 2000 and Day 2000, however, the investigators wereunblinded with respect to treatment, allowing for the possibilityof performance bias. Both trials essentially employed iNO versusconventional therapy (hyperventilation in the Morris trial). Withoutthe use of a placebo gas the investigators could not maintainblinding.Morris 2000 and Day 2000 were unblinded with respect to outcomeassessment, allowing for the introduction of detection bias intotheir analyses. Miller 2000 preserved blinded outcome assessmentwhereas Russell 1998 did not comment on this level of blinding.
We based the overall assessment of methodologic quality primarilyon the quality of concealment of allocation. We also factoredpatient, physician, and outcome assessor blinding into theassessment. Based on this technique for evaluation, we foundMiller 2000 to be of the highest methodologic quality with a low riskof bias. We found Day 2000 to be of above average quality with alow to moderate risk of bias. Although concealment of allocationwas adequate, a lack of patient, physician, and outcome assessorblinding made the potential for performance and detection biaslikely. We assessed Russell 1998 to be of average methodologicquality due to lack of concealment of allocation. We determinedMorris 2000 to be of poor methodologic quality, particularly forthe lack of concealed allocation and blinding. We attempted toassess the trials of higher quality (for example Miller 2000 and Day2000) separately in a sensitivity analysis but could not do so due tosample size. These issues of methodologic quality are addressed infurther detail in the Discussion section below.Russell 1998 initially randomized 39 patients but only obtainedresults from 35 patients as four were excluded due to technicalproblems (three for failure to place a necessary pulmonary arterycatheter and one due to equipment problems). Which group thesepatients were initially assigned to was not described. Day 2000enrolled 44 patients (two patients were actually enrolled on twoseparate occasions for separate surgical procedures) and followedall to completion of the study. Four patients initially assignedto the control group were allowed to cross over and receiveiNO if conventional therapy failed. These were excluded from theanalysis. Morris 2000 enrolled 12 patients and followed all tocompletion. Miller 2000 initially enrolled 124 infants, all of whomcompleted the study. Intention to treat was preserved in all trials.
Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAll trials reported all expected outcomes. There was no risk of biasidentified in any of the studies.Other potential sources of biasTwo studies appeared to be free of other sources of bias (Miller2000; Morris 2000). Day 2000 did not analyse patients withinitial low pulmonary arterial pressure and excluded patients whodeveloped an increase in pressure afer they were already excludedfrom the study. Russell 1998 did not measure the methaemoglobinlevel in all patients who received iNO.
Efects of interventionsSee: Summary of findings for the main comparison Inhaled nitricoxide compared to placebo or conventional therapy for all infantsand children with congenital heart disease having postoperativemanagement of pulmonary hypertensionSee: Summary of findings for the main comparison for the maincomparison.Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional treatment,or bothNo data were available on several outcomes that we had hopedto include in our analysis. In particular, no long-term follow-up data were available from any of the four trials and thuswe could not assess the outcomes of long-term mortality andneurodevelopmental disability. In addition, no data on length ofhospital stay were available for analysis from any of the trials.Long-term mortalityMortality was reported in two of the four trials included in thisreview (Day 2000; Miller 2000). Day 2000 reported no deaths ineither the treatment or control group whereas Miller 2000 observedfive deaths out of the 63 children in the treatment group and threeof 61 in the control group (although only one death in each groupwas believed to be related to a PHTC). The data presented werefrom parallel trials only and, therefore, we decided to calculate anOR. The analysis showed no statistically significant diference withrespect to mortality between the two groups (OR 1.67, 95% CI 0.38to 7.30; P = 0.50) (Analysis 1.1; Figure 4). Figure 4.   Forest plot of comparison: 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional management, outcome:1.1 Mortality prior to discharge.
 Length of stay in intensive care unit or hospitalNo data were available for this outcome from any of the trialsincluded in the review.Incidence and severity of neurodevelopmental disabilityNo data were available for this outcome from any of the trialsincluded in this review.This outcome was reported only in Day 2000 with 3 PHTC out ofthe 18 children in the treatment group and 4 PHTC out of the 20children in the control group. The data were from a parallel trial andwe calculated an OR. The analysis showed no significant diferencewith respect to the absolute number of PHTC in the treatmentversus the control groups (OR 0.80, 95% CI 0.15 to 4.18; P = 0.79)(Analysis 1.2).Diference in mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) changescoreThis outcome was initially reported in two of the four trials (Morris2000; Russell 1998) and recorded, but not reported, in a third (Day2000). As a result, we obtained and analysed the raw, individualpatient data from the investigators. A reduction in MPAP wasconsidered a favourable outcome.
Overall, the meta-analysis revealed no significant change in MPAPbetween iNO and control (treatment efect -2.94 mm Hg, 95% CI-9.28 to 3.40; P = 0.36). The level of heterogeneity (I2 = 45%) was justbelow that considered significant (Analysis 1.3).Diference in mean arterial pressure (MAP) change scoreThis outcome was reported in three of the included trials (Day 2000;Morris 2000; Russell 1998). A reduction in MAP was considered anunfavourable outcome whereas no change or an increase in MAPfrom baseline was considered favourable.Overall, the meta-analysis revealed no significant diference inefect between the two groups (treatment efect -3.55 mm Hg, 95%CI -11.86 to 4.76; P = 0.40). We observed no heterogeneity (I2 = 0%)between trials (Analysis 1.4).Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsDiference in heart rate (HR) change scoreThis outcome was reported in three of the four trials (Day 2000;Morris 2000; Russell 1998). A reduction in HR, assuming constantstroke volume, was considered an unfavourable outcome ascompared to no change or an increase from baseline.Overall, the meta-analysis did not show a significant diference inoverall efect in either group (treatment efect 0.02 bpm, 95% CI-8.13 to 8.18; P = 1.00). We observed no heterogeneity betweenstudies (I2 = 0%) (Analysis 1.5).Only one parallel trial (Day 2000) included this outcome. Anincrease in this ratio was considered a favourable outcome andindicative of improved arterial oxygenation. The trial observed nosignificant change in the ratio with the use of iNO as compared withcontrol (MD 17.18, 95% CI -28.21 to 62.57; P = 0.46) (Analysis 1.6).This outcome was reported in only one of the four studies (Day2000). An increase in methaemoglobin level was considered anunfavourable outcome. These data were from a parallel trial andthus we calculated a weighted mean diference. Overall, there was asignificantly elevated methaemoglobin level in the iNO group whencompared to control (MD 0.30%, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.36; P < 0.00001).However, the maximum methaemoglobin level did not approachtoxicity levels (> 10%) (Analysis 1.7).Subgroup analysesInhaled nitric oxide versus conventional management
This analysis utilized data from Day 2000 and Morris 2000. Theseinvestigators compared the use of iNO to conventional therapies inthe management of postoperative pulmonary hypertension.Mortality prior to dischargeData from Day 2000 revealed no deaths in either treatment orcontrol groups and so no analysis was performed.Mean number of pulmonary hypertensive crises (PHTC)The analysis revealed no significant diference in the number ofPHTC experienced by the treatment and control groups (the samedata as that presented in Analysis 1.2).This analysis included data from Day 2000 and Morris 2000. Weobserved no statistically significant change in MPAP (treatmentefect -1.14 mm Hg, 95% CI -8.87 to 6.59; P = 0.77) and a significantamount of heterogeneity between studies (I2 = 58%) (Analysis 1.3).The data analysis revealed no significant diference in the changein MAP between treatment and control groups (treatment efect-1.94 mm Hg, 95% CI -11.23 to 7.35; P = 0.68). We observed noheterogeneity between studies on this outcome (Analysis 1.4).This analysis was again comprised of data from Day 2000 and Morris2000. There was no significant diference observed in the changein HR between groups (treatment efect -0.37 bpm, 95% CI -8.85 to8.10; P = 0.93). No heterogeneity was observed (Analysis 1.5).Diference in PaO2:FiO2 change scoreThis outcome included data only from Day 2000, which was thesame data as presented in Analysis 1.6 .Maximum methaemoglobin levelThis outcome was reported in only one study (Day 2000), which wasthe same data as presented in Analysis 1.7.Inhaled nitric oxide versus placeboThis analysis separated those trials utilizing placebo in the controlgroup from those which initiated conventional therapy (that ishyperventilation, pressor support, etc). We included Miller 2000and Russell 1998.Mortality prior to discharge
Miller 2000 reported on this outcome. Since the only other trial (Day2000) that also reported mortality had no events the results werethe same as previously described (Analysis 1.1).Diference in MPAP change scoreWe utilized data from Russell 1998 in this analysis and observed nosignificant change in MPAP in the treatment group compared withplacebo (treatment efect -9.15 mm Hg, 95% CI -20.70 to 2.40; P =0.12) (Analysis 1.3).Diference in MAP change scoreWe utilized data from Russell 1998 in this analysis and observedno significant change in MAP with the use of iNO (treatment efect-10.00 mm Hg, 95% CI -28.60 to 8.60; P = 0.29) (Analysis 1.4).Diference in HR change scoreWe utilized data from Russell 1998 in this analysis. We observedno significant diference between the treatment and control groupswith respect to change in HR (treatment efect 5.00 bpm, 95% CI-24.99 to 34.99; P = 0.74) (Analysis 1.5).Sensitivity analysis
We considered Day 2000 and Miller 2000 to be of highestmethodologic quality. Miller 2000 only reported on the outcomemortality prior to discharge. This was the same data as presentedin Analysis 1.1, which showed no significant diference betweengroups (P = 0.50). No other sensitivity analyses could be performed.D I S C U S S I O NSummary of main resultsA substantial amount of data have been published favouring theuse of iNO in the treatment of neonates with persistent pulmonaryhypertension (Clark 2000; Kinsella 1992; NINOS 1997; Roberts1992; Roberts 1997). These findings have encouraged research inother patient populations demonstrating pulmonary hypertension.In children with CHD, elevated pulmonary arterial pressuresmay complicate postoperative recovery and, in some instances,potentiate life-threatening crises. As a result, safe and efectivetherapeutic intervention has been sought. This review evaluatedInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsthe therapeutic role of iNO in the postoperative management ofinfants and children with CHD.The four RCTs included in this review focused on twomajor types of primary objectives. Day 2000 and Miller 2000evaluated the postoperative efect of iNO on short-term clinicaloutcomes (for example mortality, number of life-threatening crises,improvements in oxygenation), while Morris 2000 and Russell1998 evaluated the physiologic changes (for example MPAP, MAP,HR) that occur with the use of iNO. Unfortunately, no data werecollected to evaluate the long-term outcomes of morbidity (forexample neurodevelopmental disability) and mortality.In analysing the primary outcome of mortality prior to discharge,we observed no statistically significant diference between thetreatment and control groups. These findings are based on datafrom two trials (Day 2000; Miller 2000), one of which (Day 2000)observed no deaths in either group studied. While these findingsindicate no substantial diference in mortality between thosechildren treated with iNO and those treated with placebo orconventional therapy, the relatively small sample size (N = 162) andlow incidence of PHTC-related postoperative deaths (N = 2) must beconsidered when attempting to draw general conclusions. A similarproblem arises in the analysis of secondary outcomes. While nodiferences were observed between treatment and control groupswith respect to the number of PHTC in the postoperative period, thedata are based on one RCT (Day 2000).
Morris 2000 and Russell 1998 focused on changes inhaemodynamics in the postoperative period. Day 2000 and Miller2000 also documented these changes but as secondary outcomes.As a selective pulmonary vasodilator, one might expect iNO tocause a significant decrease in MPAP when compared with placebo.When we examined this outcome we observed no statisticallysignificant change in MPAP with the use of iNO versus control.Similarly, no significant diferences were observed between groupswith respect to changes in MAP or HR. Subgroup analysis bymethod of control also demonstrated no significant diferencesin haemodynamics with either method of control, but validinterpretation of these findings was dificult based on the smallnumbers of patients analysed in each group.The ratio PaO2:FiO2 is a measure of oxygenation and a positivechange in this ratio implies an improvement. This outcome wasmeasured in only one trial (Day 2000) and revealed no significantdiference between treatment and control groups. It is unclearwhether this lack of improvement is related to inefectiveness ofiNO to promote increased pulmonary blood flow.The maximum methaemoglobin level, a measure of toxicity, wasreported only in Day 2000. In the analysis there was a significantincrease in this measure in the iNO group as compared to thecontrol group, which one would expect as methaemoglobin, abyproduct of iNO, should not be elevated in the control group. Whatis more important is whether or not the maximum level approachedtoxicity (> 10%), which it did not.Thus, from this analysis it appears that the postoperative use ofiNO does not result in a significant reduction in mortality and thenumber of PHTC, nor does its use appear to significantly alterhaemodynamics or result in any improvement in other clinicallyrelevant outcomes such as arterial oxygenation. However, thevalidity of these conclusions needs to be examined further.
The major limitation of this review relates to sample size which,when data were available, afected both the precision andinterpretability of the results. When assessing one of our primaryoutcomes, mortality prior to discharge, data were available fromonly two trials (Day 2000; Miller 2000) with only two deathsobserved. Similarly, when assessing the number of PHTC, datawere only available from one trial (Day 2000). Furthermore,data on long-term mortality, neurodevelopmental disability, andlength of stay were simply not available. In addition, there wassignificant potential for selection bias in two of the four trials(Morris 2000; Russell 1998) and heterogeneity between studiesgiven that all trials utilized diferent concentrations of inhaled nitricoxide, diferent lengths of administration of therapy, and includedpatients with diverse congenital heart lesions and of various ages.The strengths of the review were that it included four RCTs. Also,we were able to obtain data on the majority of our outcomesof interest, which included individual patient data in most cases.Lastly, while there was concern about heterogeneity, no significantheterogeneity was observed between studies when analysing themajority of outcomes of interest.
Overall completeness and applicability of evidenceSeveral factors exist within and amongst the included trials thatmake an accurate meta-analysis with a definitive conclusiondificult. The first area of concern to be addressed is with respectto the methodologic quality of the included studies. The trial ofhighest methodologic quality (Miller 2000) only included data withrespect to mortality that could be included in the analysis. Of thethree remaining trials, we assessed only one (Day 2000) as beingof relatively high methodologic quality based on concealment ofallocation. Thus, the potential for selection bias is likely in theremaining two trials (Morris 2000; Russell 1998). Although theresults of this meta-analysis do not appear to show any significantclinical benefit of iNO to treat pulmonary hypertension in childrenwith CHD, any significant clinical harm is not identified in thissystematic review.Quality of the evidenceWe considered the quality of the evidence using the measurementof risk of bias. There was one study that had a low risk of bias inall domains (Miller 2000). Random sequence generation, allocationconcealment, incomplete outcome data, and selective reportingwere not assessed as high risk of bias in all included studies.Small sample sizes afected precision of the results. There was notsubstantial heterogeneity between the studies that analysed themajority of outcomes of interest.
Potential biases in the review processFactors that also contribute to potential biases are lack of blindingto the intervention (Day 2000; Morris 2000) and lack of blindedoutcome assessment, or failure to report this procedure, in all threestudies. Therefore, the potential for the introduction of bias intothe trials and subsequently the analysis is likely. We attemptedto address this issue via sensitivity analysis, by evaluating onlythose trials of high methodologic quality (Day 2000; Miller 2000).Unfortunately the only outcome that could be assessed, given thelack of individual data from one trial (Miller 2000), was mortalityprior to discharge.Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAlso of concern is the relatively sparse number of patients includedin the majority of the studies, as documented in the 'Additionaltables' section of this review (see Table 1; Table 2; Table 3). Atotal of 73 outcomes collected from 62 infants and children (iNOgroup = 34, placebo and conventional management groups = 39)were included (the discrepancy arises as a result of the cross-overdesign of Morris 2000). A possible explanation for the relativelysmall numbers of participants lies in the fact that we are dealingwith a very specific population with CHD necessitating repair anddemonstrating elevated pulmonary arterial pressures. The smallsample sizes are reflected in the wide CIs seen in the analysis and,as a result, compromise the precision of the review.
Another serious problem with the meta-analysis concernsthe potential heterogeneity that exists among the includedinvestigations. All four trials utilized diferent concentrations ofiNO, diferent lengths of administration of therapy, and includedpatients with diverse congenital heart lesions and of various ages.While the I2 statistic for heterogeneity is not statistically significantin most cases, the potential is apparent. An attempt to deal withthis is presented in the form of the subgroup analysis on methodof control. Unfortunately, further subgroup analyses based onhost factors and concentration of iNO administered could not beperformed due to small sample sizes and missing individual patientdata. Therefore, although no significant diferences were observedwith the use of iNO in this patient population, there is the potentialfor heterogeneity and bias that compromise the results of thereview and make it impossible to draw any definitive conclusionsat the present time.Agreements and disagreements with other studies orreviewsA Cochrane systematic review considered inhaled nitric oxide forrespiratory failure in infants born at or near term (Finer 2009). Theauthors found a statistically significant reduction in death or needfor extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with the use ofiNO (Mantel-Hanzel risk ratio 0.65, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.76). This paperdid not include studies from our review as it focused on infants withacute respiratory disease, not postoperative patients with CHD,and assessed diferent outcomes of interest including the need forECMO.A U T H O R S '   C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practiceThe results of this meta-analysis do not appear to show anysignificant clinical benefit with the use of postoperative iNO totreat pulmonary hypertension in children with CHD. We haveobserved no diferences with respect to mortality, number of PHTC,arterial oxygenation, or changes in haemodynamics with the useof postoperative iNO. There are no data to determine the efects oftreatment with iNO on length of stay in an ICU or hospital, long-term mortality, or neurodevelopmental disability. Furthermore, therelatively sparse patient population and the potential biases thatmay be present as a result of problems with the methodology ofthe trials make it impossible to draw any valid conclusions abouttreatment efect at this time.Implications for researchIt is evident from this review that more data from randomizedcontrolled trials of high methodologic quality are necessary inorder to appropriately evaluate the therapeutic potential of iNOin this clinical setting. Also, although the outcomes reviewed inthese trials are of clinical importance, more relevant outcomesneed to be assessed. In particular, additional patient data withrespect to mortality; length of ICU and hospital stay, or both;neurodevelopmental outcomes; and measures of oxygenationnecessitate further investigation.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T SWe would like to thank Dr Mathew Zacharias, Professor MarcusMullner, Dr Tom Pedersen, Dr Karen Burns, Dr Keith Barrington,and The Cochrane Heart Group peer reviewers and consumer panelfor their help and editorial advice during the preparation of ourprotocol. We would also like to thank Dr Mathew Zacharias, Dr KeithBarrington, Dr Ronald Day, Dr Robert Tulloh, Professor NathanPace, Kathie Godfrey, Janet Wale and Jane Cracknell for theirassistance and editorial comments during the preparation of theoriginal published review (Bizzarro 2005).We would like to thank Dr Ronald Day for the contribution of hisindividual patient data for analysis and inclusion in this review.We would also like to thank Dr Michael Bracken for his instructionin the concepts and principles of evidence-based medicine andthe preparation of a systematic review in addition to his statisticalassistance with the analyses of data.Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  
Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsR E F E R E N C E S References to studies included in this reviewDay 2000 {published and unpublished data}*  Day RW, Hawkins JA, McGough EC, Crezee KL, Orsmond GS.Randomized controlled study of inhaled nitric oxide aferoperation for congenital heart surgery. Annals of ThoracicSurgery 2000;69(6):1907-13. [MEDLINE: PMID: 10892945]Miller 2000 {published data only}*  Miller OI, Tang SF, Keech A, Pigott NB, Beller E, Celermajer DS.Inhaled nitric oxide and prevention of pulmonary hypertensionafer congenital heart surgery: a randomised double-blindstudy. Lancet 2000;356(9240):1464-9. [MEDLINE: PMID:11081528]Morris 2000 {published data only}*  Morris K, Beghetti M, Petros A, Adatia I, Bohn D. Comparisonof hyperventilation and inhaled nitric oxide for pulmonaryhypertension afer repair of congenital heart disease. CriticalCare Medicine 2000;28(8):2974-8. [MEDLINE: PMID: 10966281]Russell 1998 {published data only}*  Russell IA, Zwass MS, Fineman JR, Balea M, Rouine-Rapp K, Brook M, et al. The efects of inhaled nitric oxideon postoperative pulmonary hypertension in infants andchildren undergoing surgical repair of congenital heart disease.Anesthesia and Analgesia 1998;87(1):46-51. References to studies excluded from this reviewArgenziano 1998 {published data only}Argenziano M, Choudhri AF, Moazami N, Rose EA, Smith CR,Levin HR, et al. Randomized, double-blind trial of inhaled nitricoxide in LVAD recipients with pulmonary hypertension. Annalsof Thoracic Surgery 1998;65(2):340-5. [MEDLINE: PMID: 9485226]Checchia 2013 {published data only}Checchia PA, Bronicki RA, Muenzer JT, Dixon D, Raithel S,Gandhi SK, et al. Nitric oxide delivery during cardiopulmonarybypass reduces postoperative morbidity in children--arandomized trial. Journal of Thoracic and CardiovascularSurgery 2013;146(3):530-6. [MEDLINE: 23228403]Khazin 2004 {published data only}
Khazin V, Kaufman Y, Zabeeda D, Medalion B, Sasson L,Schachner A, et al. Milrinone and nitric oxide: combined efecton pulmonary artery pressures afer cardiopulmonary bypassin children. Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia2004;18(2):156-9. [MEDLINE: PMID: 15073704]Kirbas 2012 {published data only}Kirbas A, Yalcin Y, Tanrikulu N, Gurer O, Isik O. Comparison ofinhaled nitric oxide and aerosolized iloprost in pulmonaryhypertension in children with congenital heart surgery.Cardiology Journal 2012;19(4):387-94. [MEDLINE: 22825900]Loukhanov 2011 {published data only}Loukanov T, Bucsenez D, Springer W, Sebening C, Rauch H,Roesch E, et al. Comparison of inhaled nitric oxide withaerosolized iloprost for treatment of pulmonary hypertensionin children afer cardiopulmonary bypass surgery. ClinicalResearch in Cardiology 2011;100(7):595-602. [MEDLINE: PMID:21318559]Matsui 1997 {published data only}Matsui J, Yahagi N, Kumon K, Hayashi H, Watanabe Y, Haruna M,et al. Efects of inhaled nitric oxide on postoperative pulmonarycirculation in patients with congenital heart disease. ArtificialOrgans 1997;21(1):17-20. [MEDLINE: PMID: 9012900]
Smith 2006 {published data only}Smith HA, Carter JA, Christian KG, Drinkwater DC, Scholl FG,Christman BW, et al. Nitric oxide precursors and congenitalheart surgery: a randomized controlled trial of oralcitrulline. Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery2006;132(1):58-65. [MEDLINE: PMID: 16798303] Additional referencesAlderson P, Green S, editors. Cochrane Collaboration openlearning material for reviewers (Version 1.1, November 2002).www.cochrane-net.org/openlearning/HTML/modA2-3.htm.Atz AM, Wessel DL. Inhaled nitric oxide in the neonate withcardiac disease. Seminars in Perinatology 1997;21(5):441-55.[MEDLINE: 9352616]Bando K, Turrentine MW, Sharp TG, Sekine Y, Aufiero TX, Sun K,et al. Pulmonary hypertension afer operations for congenitalheart disease: analysis of risk factors and management. Journalof Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 1996;112(6):1600-9.[MEDLINE: 8975852]Beghetti M, Habre W, Berner M. Continuous low dose inhalednitric oxide for treatment of severe pulmonary hypertensionafer cardiac surgery in paediatric patients. British Heart Journal1995;73(1):65-8. [MEDLINE: 7888265]Clark RH, Kueser TJ, Walker MW, Southgate WM, Huckaby JL,Perez JA, et al. Low-dose nitric oxide therapy for persistentpulmonary hypertension of the newborn. New England Journalof Medicine 2000;342(7):469-74. [MEDLINE: 10675427]
Cochrane Neonatal Review Group. Organization of a systematicreview for the Cochrane Neonatal Review Group. Guidelines forreviewers and editors. www.cochrane.mcmaster.ca/neonatal/.Curran RD, Mavroudis C, Backer CL, Sautel M, Zales VR,Wessel DL. Inhaled nitric oxide for children with congenitalInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviewsheart disease and pulmonary hypertension. Annals of ThoracicSurgery 1995;60(6):1765-71. [MEDLINE: 8787478]
DiBlasi RM, Myers TR, Hess DR. Evidence-based clinical practiceguideline: inhaled nitric oxide for neonates with acute hypoxicrespiratory failure. Respiratory Care 2010;55(12):1717-45.[MEDLINE: 21122181]Dickersin 1994Dickersin K, Scherer R, Lefebvre C. Identifying relevant studiesfor systematic reviews. BMJ 1994;309:1286-9. [MEDLINE:7718048]Finer N, Barrington KJ. Nitric oxide for respiratory failure ininfants born at or near term. Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews 2006, Issue 11. [DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000399]Gorenflo M, Gu H, Xu Z. Peri-operative pulmonary hypertensionin paediatric patients: current strategies in children withcongenital heart disease. Cardiology 2010;116(1):10-7.[MEDLINE: 20424447]Haworth SG. Pulmonary vascular disease in diferent typesof congenital heart disease. Implications for interpretation oflung biopsy findings in early childhood. British Heart Journal1984;52(5):557-71. [MEDLINE: 6498033]Higgins JPT, Green S, editors. Cochrane Handbook forSystematic Reviews of Interventions 5.1.0 [updated March2011]. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available fromwww.cochrane-handbook.org.Jones OD, Shore DF, Rigby ML, Leijala M, Scallan J,Shinebourne EA, et al. The use of tolazoline hydrochlorideas a pulmonary vasodilator in potentially fatal episodes ofpulmonary vasoconstriction afer cardiac surgery in children.Circulation 1981;64(2 Part 2):II134-9. [MEDLINE: 7249314]
Journois D, Pouard P, Mauriat P, Malhere T, Vouhe P, Safran D.Inhaled nitric oxide as a therapy for pulmonary hypertensionafer operations for congenital heart disease. Journal ofThoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 1994;107(4):1129-35.[MEDLINE: 8159035]Kinsella JP, Neish SR, Shafer E, Abman SH. Low-dose inhalednitric oxide in persistent pulmonary hypertension of thenewborn. Lancet 1992;340(8823):819-20. [MEDLINE: 1357246]Lefebvre C, McDonald S. Development of a sensitive searchstrategy for reports of randomized controlled trials in EMBASE.Paper presented at the Fourth International CochraneColloquium. 20-24 October, 1996.Miller OI, Celermajer DS, Deanfield JE, Macrae DJ. Very low-doseinhaled nitric oxide: a selective pulmonary vasodilator aferoperations for congenital heart disease. Journal of Thoracic andCardiovascular Surgery 1994;108(3):487-94. [MEDLINE: 8078341]Nelin LD, Hofman GM. The use of inhaled nitric oxide in a widevariety of clinical problems. Pediatric Clinics of North America1998;45(3):531-48. [MEDLINE: 9653435]Neonatal Inhaled Nitric Oxide Study Group. Inhaled nitric oxidein full-term and nearly full-term infants with hypoxic respiratoryfailure. New England Journal of Medicine 1997;336(9):597-604.[MEDLINE: 9036320]Roberts JD, Polaner DM, Lang P. Inhaled nitric oxide inpersistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Lancet1992;340(8823):818-9. [MEDLINE: 1357245]Roberts JD, Fineman JR, Morin FC, Shawl PW, Rimar S,Schreiber MD, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide and persistentpulmonary hypertension of the newborn. The InhaledNitric Oxide Study Group. New England Journal of Medicine1997;336(9):605-10. [MEDLINE: 9032045]
Steudel W, Hurford WE, Zapol WM. Inhaled nitric oxide.Basic biology and clinical applications. Anesthesiology1999;91(4):1090-121. [MEDLINE: 10519513]Wessel DL, Adatia I, Giglia TM, Thompson JE, Kulik TJ. Useof inhaled nitric oxide and acetylcholine in the evaluationof pulmonary hypertension and endothelial function afercardiopulmonary bypass. Circulation 1993;88 Suppl 1:2128-38.[MEDLINE: 8222107]Wheller J, George BL, Mulder DG, Jarmakani JM. Diagnosis andmanagement of postoperative pulmonary hypertensive crisis.Circulation 1979;60(7):1640-4. [MEDLINE: 498483]Whittsett 1999Whittsett JA, Pryhuber GS, Rice WR, Warner BB, Wert SE. Acuterespiratory disorders. In: Avery GB, Fletcher MA, MacDonald MGeditor(s). Neonatology. Pathophysiology and Management ofthe Newborn. 5th Edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams, &Wilkins, 1999:499-500. Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsReferences to other published versions of this reviewBizzarro M, Gross I. Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperativemanagement of pulmonary hypertension in infantsand children with congenital heart disease. Cochrane * Indicates the major publication for the study C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S   O F   S T U D I E SCharacteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 Participants*38 participants randomized*Included: patients with congenital heart disease who underwent a biventricular repair or heart trans-plantation with systolic pulmonary arterial pressure 50% higher than systolic systemic arterial pres-sure*Excluded: not reported*Age: months (median 6 with range from 1 day to 3 years in control group; 7 with range from 1 day to20 years in intervention group)*Sex distribution: not reported*Country: United States of AmericaInterventions1. iNO at 20 ppm. Therapy was initiated in the ICU and continued until extubation. Data were collectedat 1 hour after initiation of therapy2. Conventional management as dictated by the attending cardiothoracic surgeonNotesSingle centreSeveral patients had radiographic evidence of lung disease before operation in each groupCould be included in the following subgroup analyses: conventional managementLow riskQuote: "Patients were randomized by a blind draw from sequential groupscontaining six assignments."Comment: Probably doneAllocation concealmentLow riskQuote: "Patients were randomized by a blind draw from sequential groupscontaining six assignments."Comment: Probably doneHigh riskQuote: "Inhaled nitric oxide was then administered to patients in the treat-ment group in an open labelled, or unblinded manner as previously de-scribed ..."Comment: Not done
Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsLow risk6/44 missing data. 2 were enrolled twice. Two patients were excluded for age >14 years and 4 were excluded due to cross over. In the final analysis, there werea total of n = 18 treatment and n = 20 controlsOther biasUnclear riskQuote: "We may have failed to identify all patients with a systolic pulmonaryarterial pressure of 50% or more of the systolic systemic pressure, and somepatients with an initially low pulmonary arterial pressure may have developeda subsequent increase in pressure that was not monitored."Comment: Eligible patients could not be included in this studyDay 2000  (Continued)  MethodsParallel randomized controlled trialParticipants*124 participants randomized*Included: infants suitable for corrective heart surgery with high pulmonary flow, pressure, or both,congenital heart lesions, such as non-restrictive ventricular septal defect, complete atrioventricularseptal defect, truncus arteriosus, or total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, with objective evi-dence of pulmonary hypertension at the immediate preoperative assessment*Excluded: not reported*Age: months (median 3 with range from 1 to 5 years in treatment group; 2 with range from 1 to 4 incontrol group)*Sex distribution: M/F (36/27, 28/33)*Country: AustraliaInterventions1. iNO at 10 ppm2. Placebo management. Nitrogen was usedOutcomesPrimary: Number of pulmonary hypertensive crises and deathsSecondary: Changes in pulmonary and systemic artery pressures as well as pulmonary and systemicvascular resistance indexes, duration of mechanical ventilation, and maximum methaemoglobin levelRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tion
Low riskQuote: "Infants were randomised locally by a computer-based stratifiedminimisation algorithm, based on the presence or absence of Down's syn-drome ..."Comment: Clear. Authors employed a computer-based randomization pro-gramAllocation concealmentLow riskQuote: "On the two types of nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide monitors, thedisplays were masked with locked opaque covers."Comment: ClearBlinding of participantsand personnel All outcomesLow riskQuote: "A non-clinical investigator who was aware of treatment status wasavailable around the clock to supervise randomisation, preparation of thecylinders of study gas, and to set up gas delivery and the monitoring circuit foreach patient."Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsComment: ClearBlinding of outcome as-sessment All outcomesLow riskQuote: "The latter radiographs were reviewed independently by a chest physi-cian and radiologist who were unaware of study-gas assignment, and given apredefined lung injury score ..."Quote: "When infants were eligible for extubation, the nonclinical investigatorreduced the study-gas flow by 20% per h, aiming for complete withdrawal af-ter 4 h."Comment: Probably doneIncomplete outcome data All outcomesLow riskNo missing data. All patients analysedSelective reportingLow riskAll expected outcomes were reportedMiller 2000  (Continued)
  MethodsCross-over randomized controlled trialParticipants*12 participants randomized*Included: patients with age 1 month to 17 years, with CHD necessitating repair and with pulmonaryhypertension in the postoperative period*Excluded: not reported*Age: years (authors reported age of each patient)*Sex distribution: not reported*Country: CanadaInterventions1. iNO at 5 ppm for 15 minutes followed by 40 ppm for 15 minutes. Therapy was initiated upon arrivalin the ICU and continued for 30 minutes2. Placebo management. Hyperventilation in the control groupOutcomesPrimary: Changes in mean pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance indexSecondary: Changes in heart rate, cardiac index, stroke index, central venous pressure, lef atrial pres-sure, and mean blood pressureNotesSingle centreCould be included in the following subgroup analyses: conventional managementRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tionUnclear riskQuote: "The design was a crossover study with the order of the treatments ran-domized."Blinding of participantsand personnel All outcomesInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
Blinding of outcome as-sessment All outcomesHigh riskComment: Probably not doneIncomplete outcome data All outcomesLow riskComment: 1 patient was excluded due to age > 14 years. A cross-over designwas employed so that 11 patients were subsequently analysed in each group.No missing dataOther biasLow riskThe study appears to be free of other sources of biasMorris 2000  (Continued)  MethodsParallel randomized controlled trialParticipants*35 patients randomized*Included: patients with preoperative pulmonary hypertension diagnosed by either cardiac catheteri-zation or echocardiography*Excluded: not reported*Age: not reported*Sex distribution: not reported*Country: United States of AmericaInterventions1. iNOat 80 ppm. Therapy was initiated in the operating room and continued for 20 minutes2. Placebo managementOutcomesPrimary: Changes in mean pulmonary artery pressure. Secondary: Changes in heart rate and mean arte-rial pressure. Median methaemoglobin level was also assessedNotesSingle centreCould be included in the following subgroup analyses: placebo managementRisk of biasBiasAuthors' judgementSupport for judgementRandom sequence genera-tionUnclear riskQuote: "Patients were randomly assigned to receive nitrogen (placebo) or in-haled NO (diluted in a carrier gas of nitrogen) at an inspired oxygen concentra-tion of 0.90."
Comment: Authors did not list specific techniques for randomizationAllocation concealmentUnclear riskComment: Not clearBlinding of participantsand personnel All outcomesLow riskQuote: "The operative team (surgeons, anaesthesiologists, and echocardiogra-phers) were blinded to the treatment assigned."Comment: ClearBlinding of outcome as-sessment All outcomesUnclear riskQuote: "The operative team (surgeons, anaesthesiologists, and echocardiogra-phies) were blinded to the treatment assigned)"Comment: Authors did not comment on this level of blindingIncomplete outcome data All outcomesUnclear risk4/39 missing dataInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsQuote: "Results were obtained in 36 of 40 studies; 4 studies were excludedfrom the final analysis because of technical difficulties with equipment (n = 1)or surgical decision not to use a pulmonary artery catheter (n = 3). The final da-ta set was thus comprised of 36 studies from 35 patients ... "Comment: Which group these patients were initially assigned to was not de-scribed. One patient was analysed twice (at different times)Selective reportingLow riskComment: All expected outcomes were reportedOther biasHigh riskQuote: "Methemoglobin levels were measured in 9 patients who received in-haled NO and 11 patients who did not."Comment: Methemoglobin analysis was compromised
Russell 1998  (Continued)Congenital heart disease (CHD)Female (F)Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO)Intensive care unit (ICU)Male (M)Nitric oxide (NO)Number of patients (n)Parts per million (ppm) Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID] StudyReason for exclusionArgenziano 1998The trial utilized an adult patient populationChecchia 2013The trial compared inhaled nitric oxide with placebo during cardiopulmonary bypass, not in thepostoperative period, and did not assess pulmonary hypertension as an outcomeKhazin 2004The trial compared nitric oxide with milrinone and in combination with milrinone, not in placeboor conventional managementKirbas 2012The trial compared inhaled nitric oxide with aerosolized iloprost, not in placebo or conventionalmanagementLoukhanov 2011The trial compared inhaled nitric oxide with aerosolized iloprost, not in placebo or conventionalmanagementMatsui 1997The study was not a randomized clinical trialSmith 2006The trial compared citrulline, a nitric oxide precursor, with placebo  Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsComparison 1.   Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo or conventional managementOutcome or subgroup titleNo. ofstudiesNo. ofpartici-pantsStatistical methodEffect size1 Mortality prior to discharge2162Odds Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI)1.67 [0.38, 7.30]2 Pulmonary hypertensive crises138Odds Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI)0.8 [0.15, 4.18]3 Difference in MPAP change score (SE)3 Change in MPAP (Random, 95%CI)3.1 Conventional Management2 Change in MPAP (Random, 95%CI)3.2 Placebo1 Change in MPAP (Random, 95%CI)4 Difference in MAP change score (SE)3 Change in MAP (Fixed, 95% CI)-3.55 [-11.86, 4.76]4.1 Conventional Mangement2 Change in MAP (Fixed, 95% CI)-1.94 [-11.23, 7.35]4.2 Placebo1 Change in MAP (Fixed, 95% CI)-10.0 [-28.60, 8.60]5 Difference in HR change score (SE)3 Change in HR (Fixed, 95% CI)0.02 [-8.13, 8.18]5.1 Conventional Management2 Change in HR (Fixed, 95% CI)-0.37 [-8.85, 8.10]5.2 Placebo1 Change in HR (Fixed, 95% CI)5.0 [-24.99, 34.99]6 Difference in PaO2:FiO2 change score138Mean Difference (IV, Fixed, 95%CI)7 Maximum methaemoglobin level138Mean Difference (IV, Fixed, 95%CI)  Favours treatment10000.001100.11Favours control  Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAnalysis 1.2.   Comparison 1 Inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo orconventional management, Outcome 2 Pulmonary hypertensive crises.Study or subgroupTreatmentControlOdds RatioWeightOdds Ratio n/Nn/NM-H, Fixed, 95% CI M-H, Fixed, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Not applicable 
Favours treatment5000.002100.11Favours controlChange in MPAPWeightChange in MPAP NN(SE)IV, Random, 95% CI IV, Random, 95% CIHeterogeneity: Tau2=18.63; Chi2=2.38, df=1(P=0.12); I2=58.06%   Heterogeneity: Not applicable   Heterogeneity: Tau2=14.26; Chi2=3.62, df=2(P=0.16); I2=44.75% Test for subgroup differences: Chi2=1.28, df=1 (P=0.26), I2=21.58% Favours treatment5025-50-250Favours control1.4.1 Conventional Mangement Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudy or subgroupTreatmentControlChangein MAPChange in MAPWeightChange in MAP NN(SE)IV, Fixed, 95% CI IV, Fixed, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Not applicable   Favours control5025-50-250Favours treatmentChange in HRWeightChange in HR NN(SE)IV, Fixed, 95% CI IV, Fixed, 95% CIHeterogeneity: Tau2=0; Chi2=1, df=1(P=0.32); I2=0.32%   Heterogeneity: Not applicable   Test for overall effect: Z=0.01(P=1) Favours control5025-50-250Favours treatment  
Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsStudy or subgroupTreatmentControlMean DifferenceWeightMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Fixed, 95% CI Fixed, 95% CIHeterogeneity: Not applicable Favours control200100-200-1000Favours treatmentStudy or subgroupTreatmentControlMean DifferenceWeightMean Difference NMean(SD)NMean(SD)Fixed, 95% CI Fixed, 95% CI  Heterogeneity: Not applicable Test for overall effect: Z=9.23(P<0.0001) Favours treatment10.5-1-0.50Favours control TrialiNO (N)Control (N)Number of entries (N)  TrialiNO (N)Control (N)Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews A P P E N D I C E SAppendix 1. Search strategy for CENTRAL #1 HEART DEFECTS CONGENITAL#2 (congenital near heart)#3 (heart near defect*)#4 (heart near abnormal*)#5 (#1 or #2 or #3 or #4)
#6 NITRIC OXIDE#7 (nitric next oxide)#9 (#6 or #7 or #8)#10 (#5 and #9)  #1 exp Heart Defects, Congenital/ Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews+ RCT filter terms. Appendix 3. Search strategy for EMBASE #1 exp CHD/#2 (congenital$ adj3 heart).tw.#3 (heart adj3 defect$).tw.#4 (heart adj3 abnormal$).tw.#6 Nitric oxide/#7 nitric oxide.tw.#8 ino.tw.#11 random$.ti,ab.#12 factorial$.ti,ab.#13 (crossover$ or cross over$ or cross-over$).ti,ab.#14 placebo$.ti,ab.#15 (double$ adj blind$).ti,ab.#16 (singl$ adj blind$).ti,ab.#17 assign$.ti,ab.#18 allocat$.ti,ab.#19 volunteer$.ti,ab.#20 Crossover Procedure/#21 Double Blind Procedure/#22 Randomized Controlled Trial/#23 Single Blind Procedure/ Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews#25 exp animal/#26 nonhuman/#27 exp animal experiment/#29 exp human/  (Continued) Appendix 4. Data extraction formDATA EXTRACTION FORMREVIEW ID Study Id:Authors:Medline Journal Id:Year of Publication:Language:Type of study:RCT ( )CCT ( )Non-randomized ( )  Quality of Concealment of AllocationPointsAllocation was not concealed (e.g. quasi-randomization)0
 Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAllocation concealment was not stated or was unclear1Disclosure of allocation was a possibility2Allocation was concealed (e.g. numbered, sealed opaque envelopes drawn NON consecutively)3  Inclusion and exclusion criteria were not clearly defined in the text0Inclusion and exclusion criteria were clearly defined in the text1  Outcomes of patients who withdrew or were excluded after allocation were NEITHER detailed sep-arately NOR included in an intention to treatOutcomes of patients who withdrew or were excluded after allocation were EITHER detailed sepa-rately OR included in an intention to treat analysis OR the text stated there were no withdrawals  Treatment and control groups were NOT adequately described at entry0Treatment and control groups were adequately described at entryA minimum of 7 admission details were described(e.g. age, sex, mobility, type of surgery, ASA grade, function score, mental test score  The text stated that the care programmes other than trial options were NOT identical0The text stated that the care programmes other than trial options were identical1  Outcome measures were NOT clearly defined in the text0Outcome measures were clearly defined in the text1  Outcome assessors were NOT blind to the allocation of patients0Outcome assessors were blind to the allocation of patients1  The timing of the measurement of the outcomes was NOT appropriate0The timing of the measurement of the outcomes was appropriate1
  Total number of points/10  (Continued)Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews METHODS Subject-BlindedYes ( )No ( )Unclear ( )Physician-BlindedYes ( )No ( )Unclear ( )Outcome Assessor-BlindedYes ( )No ( )Unclear ( )  Number of eligible participants: ___Number enrolled in study: ___Number of males: ___Number age 0 yo 3 months: ___Number greater than 6 months to 12 months: ___Number of females: ___Number age 3 to 6 months: ___Number greater than 12 months: ___  INTERVENTIONDrugs(specify)/TherapyDoseDurationRule  Withdraws: ___Yes ( )No ( )Unclear ( )  OUTCOMESDay in hospital(mean)Death in hospital(n,%)
Long-term death(n,%)Neurologic morbidity(specify)Treatment group 1:    Treatment group 2:      Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews OUTCOMESChange in mean airwaypressureChange in mean systemicpressureChange in heartrateMaximummethaemoglobinTreatment group 1:    Treatment group 2:       CHANGES IN PROTOCOL:   CONTACT WITH AUTHOR:   OTHER COMMENTS ON THIS STUDY:  3 July 2014New search has been performedThe search was originally run in 2004 (Bizzarro 2005). In this up-dated review we reran the search strategy until December 2013.3 July 2014New citation required but conclusionshave not changedWe found three new studies. After we assessed the full articlesfor eligibility criteria we excluded these articles in (Checchia2013; Kirbas 2012; Loukhanov 2011) our updated review. No newstudies were included in the update. The conclusions were notchanged.
One new author helped update this version: Fabiano T Barbosa.We updated the methods section. We updated the risk of biastool. We included a summary of findings table.Protocol first published: Issue 4, 2004Review first published: Issue 4, 2005 Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsDateEventDescription31 July 2005New citation required and conclusionshave changedSubstantive amendment C O N T R I B U T I O N S   O F   A U T H O R SDr Matthew Bizzarro (MB), Dr Ian Gross (IG) and Fabian T Barbosa (FTB) updated this review.Conceiving the review: MBCo-ordinating the review: FTBUndertaking manual searches: MBScreening search results: MB, IGOrganizing retrieval of papers: MBScreening retrieved papers against inclusion criteria: MBAppraising quality of papers: MB, IG, FTBAbstracting data from papers: MBWriting to authors of papers for additional information: MBProviding additional data about papers: MBObtaining and screening data on unpublished studies: MBData management for the review: MBEntering data into Review Manager (RevMan 5.2): FTBRevMan statistical data: MB, FTBOther statistical analysis not using RevMan: MBDouble entry of data: MB, FTBInterpretation of data: MB, IGStatistical inferences: MBWriting the review: FTBSecuring funding for the review: N/APerforming previous work that was the foundation of the present study: MBGuarantor for the review (one author): MBPerson responsible for reading and checking review before submission: MB, IG, FTBD E C L A R A T I O N S   O F   I N T E R E S T
Matthew Bizzarro: none knownIan Gross: none knownFabiano T Barbos: none knownS O U R C E S   O F   S U P P O R TInternal sources*Yale University School of Medicine, USA.External sources*No sources of support suppliedD I F F E R E N C E S   B E T W E E N   P R O T O C O L   A N D   R E V I E W1. One new author was included (Fabiano T Barbosa).2. We updated the methods section. Risk of bias tools were included in this updated review and items analysed before in 'risk of biasin included studies' (method of randomization, concealment of allocation, blinding of intervention, completeness of follow up, andblinded outcome assessment) were renamed to random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants andpersonnel, blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other bias.3. Items of the risk of bias tables were reanalysed.Inhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CochraneLibraryTrusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews4. We included a summary of findings table.N O T E SNoneI N D E X   T E R M SMedical Subject Headings (MeSH)Administration, Inhalation;  Heart Defects, Congenital  [*surgery];  Heart Diseases  [congenital]  [surgery];  Hypertension, Pulmonary [*drug therapy]  [mortality];  Nitric Oxide  [administration & dosage]  [*therapeutic use];  Postoperative Complications  [*drug therapy] [mortality];  Randomized Controlled Trials as TopicMeSH check wordsChild; Child, Preschool; Humans; InfantInhaled nitric oxide for the postoperative management of pulmonary hypertension in infants and children with congenital heart disease(Review)Copyright (c) 2014 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
